\PassOptionsToPackage{unicode=true}{hyperref} % options for packages loaded elsewhere
\PassOptionsToPackage{hyphens}{url}
%
\documentclass[a4paper,11pt,twoside,openright]{book}

\usepackage{ifxetex}
\ifxetex
\else
  \errmessage{Must be built with xelatex}
\fi

\input{../common/fonts.tex}
\input{../common/packages.tex}
\input{../common/setup.tex}

\title{Architecture of a Database System}
\author{
Joseph M. Hellerstein \thanks{University of California, Berkeley, USA, hellerstein@cs.berkeley.edu} \\%
Michael Stonebraker \thanks{Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA} \\%
James Hamilton \thanks{Microsoft Research, USA}}
\date{}

\begin{document}

\maketitle
\thispagestyle{empty}

\cleardoublepage
\pagenumbering{roman}
\tableofcontents

\hypertarget{abstract}{%
\chapter*{Abstract}\label{abstract}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{chapter}{Abstract}
\markboth{Abstract}{}
\pagenumbering{arabic}

Database Management Systems (DBMSs) are a ubiquitous and critical
component of modern computing, and the result of decades of research and
development in both academia and industry. Historically, DBMSs were
among the earliest multi-user server systems to be developed, and thus
pioneered many systems design techniques for scalability and reliability
now in use in many other contexts. While many of the algorithms and
abstractions used by a DBMS are textbook material, there has been
relatively sparse coverage in the literature of the systems design
issues that make a DBMS work. This paper presents an architectural
discussion of DBMS design principles, including process models, parallel
architecture, storage system design, transaction system implementation,
query processor and optimizer architectures, and typical shared
components and utilities. Successful commercial and open-source systems
are used as points of reference, particularly when multiple alternative
designs have been adopted by different groups.

\hypertarget{introduction}{%
\chapter{Introduction}\label{introduction}}

Database Management Systems (DBMSs) are complex, mission-critical
software systems. Today's DBMSs embody decades of academic and
industrial research and intense corporate software development. Database
systems were among the earliest widely deployed online server systems
and, as such, have pioneered design solutions spanning not only data
management, but also applications, operating systems, and networked
services. The early DBMSs are among the most influential software
systems in computer science, and the ideas and implementation issues
pioneered for DBMSs are widely copied and reinvented.

For a number of reasons, the lessons of database systems architecture
are not as broadly known as they should be. First, the applied database
systems community is fairly small. Since market forces only support a
few competitors at the high end, only a handful of successful DBMS
implementations exist. The community of people involved in designing and
implementing database systems is tight: many attended the same schools,
worked on the same influential research projects, and collaborated on
the same commercial products. Second, academic treatment of database
systems often ignores architectural issues. Textbook presentations of
database systems traditionally focus on algorithmic and theoretical
issues --- which are natural to teach, study, and test --- without a
holistic discussion of system architecture in full implementations. In
sum, much conventional wisdom about how to build database systems is
available, but little of it has been written down or communicated
broadly.

In this paper, we attempt to capture the main architectural aspects of
modern database systems, with a discussion of advanced topics. Some of
these appear in the literature, and we provide references where
appropriate. Other issues are buried in product manuals, and some are
simply part of the oral tradition of the community. Where applicable, we
use commercial and open-source systems as examples of the various
architectural forms discussed. Space prevents, however, the enumeration
of the exceptions and finer nuances that have found their way into these
multi-million line code bases, most of which are well over a decade old.
Our goal here is to focus on overall system design and stress issues not
typically discussed in textbooks, providing useful context for more
widely known algorithms and concepts. We assume that the reader is
familiar with textbook database systems material (e.g., {[}72{]} or
{[}83{]}) and with the basic facilities of modern operating systems such
as UNIX, Linux, or Windows. After introducing the high-level
architecture of a DBMS in the next section, we provide a number of
references to background reading on each of the components in Section
1.2.

\hypertarget{relational-systems-the-life-of-a-query}{%
\section{Relational Systems: The Life of a
Query}\label{relational-systems-the-life-of-a-query}}

The most mature and widely used database systems in production today are
relational database management systems (RDBMSs). These systems can be
found at the core of much of the world's application infrastructure
including e-commerce, medical records, billing, human resources,
payroll, customer relationship management and supply chain management,
to name a few. The advent of web-based commerce and community-oriented
sites has only increased the volume and breadth of their use. Relational
systems serve as the repositories of record behind nearly all online
transactions and most online content management systems (blogs, wikis,
social networks, and the like). In addition to being important software
infrastructure, relational database systems serve as a well-understood point of reference for new extensions and revolutions
in database systems that may arise in the future. As a result, we focus
on relational database systems throughout this paper.

At heart, a typical RDBMS has five main components, as illustrated in
\autoref{fig-1-1}. As an introduction to each of these components and the way
they fit together, we step through the life of a query in a database
system. This also serves as an overview of the remaining sections of the
paper.

\begin{figure}
%\includegraphics[width=4.66667in,height=3.24444in]{./media/image1.jpeg}
\includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{fig-1-1.pdf}

\caption{Main components of a DBMS.\label{fig-1-1}}
\end{figure}

Consider a simple but typical database interaction at an airport, in
which a gate agent clicks on a form to request the passenger list for a
flight. This button click results in a single-query transaction that
works roughly as follows:

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}

\item
  The personal computer at the airport gate (the ``client'') calls an
  API that in turn communicates over a network to establish a connection
  with the \emph{Client Communications Manager} of a DBMS (top of \autoref{fig-1-1}). In some cases, this connection is established between the client
  and the database server directly, e.g., via the ODBC or JDBC
  connectivity protocol. This arrangement is termed a ``two-tier'' or
  ``client-server'' system. In other cases, the client may communicate
  with a ``middle-tier server'' (a web server, transaction processing
  monitor, or the like), which in turn uses a protocol to proxy the
  communication between the client and the DBMS. This is usually called
  a ``three-tier'' system. In many web-based scenarios there is yet
  another ``application server'' tier between the web server and the
  DBMS, resulting in four tiers. Given these various options, a typical
  DBMS needs to be compatible with many different connectivity protocols
  used by various client drivers and middleware systems. At base,
  however, the responsibility of the DBMS' client communications manager
  in all these protocols is roughly the same: to establish and remember
  the connection state for the caller (be it a client or a middleware
  server), to respond to SQL commands from the caller, and to return
  both data and control messages (result codes, errors, etc.) as
  appropriate. In our simple example, the communications manager would
  establish the security credentials of the client, set up state to
  remember the details of the new connection and the current SQL command
  across calls, and forward the client's first request deeper into the
  DBMS to be processed.
\item
  Upon receiving the client's first SQL command, the DBMS must assign a
  ``thread of computation'' to the command. It must also make sure that
  the thread's data and control outputs are connected via the
  communications manager to the client. These tasks are the job of the
  DBMS \emph{Process Manager} (left side of \autoref{fig-1-1}). The most
  important decision that the DBMS needs to make at this stage in the
  query regards \emph{admission control}: whether the system should
  begin processing the query immediately, or defer execution until a
  time when enough system resources are available to devote to this
  query. We discuss Process Management in detail in Section 2.
  \item
    Once admitted and allocated as a thread of control, the gate agent's
    query can begin to execute. It does so by invoking the code in the
    \emph{Relational Query Processor} (center, \autoref{fig-1-1}). This set of
    modules checks that the user is authorized to run the query, and
    compiles the user's SQL query text into an internal \emph{query
    plan}. Once compiled, the resulting query plan is handled via the
    plan executor. The plan executor consists of a suite of
    ``operators'' (relational algorithm implementations) for executing
    any query. Typical operators implement relational query processing
    tasks including joins, selection, projection, aggregation, sorting
    and so on, as well as calls to request data records from lower
    layers of the system. In our example query, a small subset of these
    operators --- as assembled by the query optimization process --- is
    invoked to satisfy the gate agent's query. We discuss the query
    processor in Section 4.
  \item
    At the base of the gate agent's query plan, one or more operators
    exist to request data from the database. These operators make calls
    to fetch data from the DBMS' \emph{Transactional Storage Manager}
    (\autoref{fig-1-1}, bottom), which manages all data access (read) and
    manipulation (create, update, delete) calls. The storage system
    includes algorithms and data structures for organizing and accessing
    data on disk (``access methods''), including basic structures like
    tables and indexes. It also includes a buffer management module that
    decides when and what data to transfer between disk and memory
    buffers. Returning to our example, in the course of accessing data
    in the access methods, the gate agent's query must invoke the
    transaction management code to ensure the well-known ``ACID''
    properties of transactions {[}30{]} (discussed in more detail in
    Section 5.1). Before accessing data, locks are acquired from a lock
    manager to ensure correct execution in the face of other concurrent
    queries. If the gate agent's query involved updates to the database,
    it would interact with the log manager to ensure that the
    transaction was durable if committed, and fully undone if aborted.
    In Section 5, we discuss storage and buffer management in more
    detail; Section 6 covers the transactional consistency architecture.
\item
  At this point in the example query's life, it has begun to access data
  records, and is ready to use them to compute results for the client.
  This is done by ``unwinding the stack'' of activities we described up
  to this point. The access methods return control to the query
  executor's operators, which orchestrate the computation of result
  tuples from database data; as result tuples are generated, they are
  placed in a buffer for the client communications manager, which ships
  the results back to the caller. For large result sets, the client
  typically will make additional calls to fetch more data incrementally
  from the query, resulting in multiple iterations through the
  communications manager, query executor, and storage manager. In our
  simple example, at the end of the query the transaction is completed
  and the connection closed; this results in the transaction manager
  cleaning up state for the transaction, the process manager freeing any
  control structures for the query, and the communications manager
  cleaning up communication state for the connection.
\end{enumerate}

Our discussion of this example query touches on many of the key
components in an RDBMS, but not all of them. The right-hand side of
\autoref{fig-1-1} depicts a number of shared components and utilities that are
vital to the operation of a full-function DBMS. The catalog and memory
managers are invoked as utilities during any transaction, including our
example query. The catalog is used by the query processor during
authentication, parsing, and query optimization. The memory manager is
used throughout the DBMS whenever memory needs to be dynamically
allocated or deallocated. The remaining modules listed in the rightmost
box of \autoref{fig-1-1} are utilities that run independently of any particular
query, keeping the database as a whole well-tuned and reliable. We
discuss these shared components and utilities in Section 7.

\hypertarget{scope-and-overview}{%
\section{Scope and Overview}\label{scope-and-overview}}

In most of this paper, our focus is on architectural fundamentals
supporting core database functionality. We do not attempt to provide a
comprehensive review of database algorithmics that have been extensively
documented in the literature. We also provide only minimal discussion of
many extensions present in modern DBMSs, most of which provide features
beyond core data management but do not significantly alter the system
architecture. However, within the various sections of this paper we note
topics of interest that are beyond the scope of the paper, and where
possible we provide pointers to additional reading.

We begin our discussion with an investigation of the overall
architecture of database systems. The first topic in any server system
architecture is its overall process structure, and we explore a variety
of viable alternatives on this front, first for uniprocessor machines
and then for the variety of parallel architectures available today. This
discussion of core server system architecture is applicable to a variety
of systems, but was to a large degree pioneered in DBMS design.
Following this, we begin on the more domain-specific components of a
DBMS. We start with a single query's view of the system, focusing on the
relational query processor. Following that, we move into the storage
architecture and transactional storage management design. Finally, we
present some of the shared components and utilities that exist in most
DBMSs, but are rarely discussed in textbooks.

\hypertarget{process-models}{%
\chapter{Process Models}\label{process-models}}

When designing any multi-user server, early decisions need to be made
regarding the execution of concurrent user requests and how these are
mapped to operating system processes or threads. These decisions have a
profound influence on the software architecture of the system, and on
its performance, scalability, and portability across operating
systems.\footnote{Many but not all DBMSs are designed to be portable
across a wide variety of host operating systems. Notable examples of
OS-specific DBMSs are DB2 for zSeries and Microsoft SQL Server. Rather
than using only widely available OS facilities, these products are free
to exploit the unique facilities of their single host.}
In this section, we survey a number of
options for DBMS process models, which serve as a template for many
other highly concurrent server systems. We begin with a simplified
framework, assuming the availability of good operating system support
for threads, and we initially target only a uniprocessor system. We then
expand on this simplified discussion to deal with the realities of how
modern DBMSs implement their process models. In Section 3, we discuss
techniques to exploit clusters of computers, as well as multi-processor
and multi-core systems.

The discussion that follows relies on these definitions:

\begin{itemize}

\item
  An \emph{Operating System Process} combines an operating system (OS)
  program execution unit (a thread of control) with an address space private to the process. Included in the state maintained
for a process are OS resource handles and the security context. This
single unit of program execution is scheduled by the OS kernel and each
process has its own unique address space.
\item
  An \emph{Operating System Thread} is an OS program execution unit
  without additional private OS context and without a private address
  space. Each OS thread has full access to the memory of other threads
  executing within the same \emph{multi-threaded} OS Process. Thread
  execution is scheduled by the operating system kernel scheduler and
  these threads are often called ``kernel threads'' or k-threads.
\item
  A \emph{Lightweight Thread Package} is an application-level construct
  that supports multiple threads within a single OS process. Unlike OS
  threads scheduled by the OS, lightweight threads are scheduled by an
  application-level thread scheduler. The difference between a
  lightweight thread and a kernel thread is that a lightweight thread is
  scheduled in user-space without kernel scheduler involvement or
  knowledge. The combination of the user-space scheduler and all of its
  lightweight threads run within a single OS process and appears to the
  OS scheduler as a single thread of execution.

Lightweight threads have the advantage of faster thread switches when
compared to OS threads since there is no need to do an OS kernel mode
switch to schedule the next thread. Lightweight threads have the
disadvantage, however, that any blocking operation such as a
synchronous I/O by any thread will block all threads in the process.
This prevents any of the other threads from making progress while one
thread is blocked waiting for an OS resource. Lightweight thread
packages avoid this by (1) issuing only asynchronous (non-blocking) I/O
requests and (2) not invoking any OS operations that could block.
Generally, lightweight threads offer a more difficult programming model
than writing software based on either OS processes or OS threads.

\item
  Some DBMSs implement their own lightweight thread (LWT) packages.
  These are a special case of general LWT packages. We refer to these
  threads as \emph{DBMS threads} and simply \emph{threads} when the
  distinction between DBMS, general LWT, and OS threads are unimportant
  to the discussion.
\item
  A \emph{DBMS Client} is the software component that implements the API
  used by application programs to communicate with a DBMS. Some example
  database access APIs are JDBC, ODBC, and OLE/DB. In addition, there
  are a wide variety of proprietary database access API sets. Some
  programs are written using embedded SQL, a technique of mixing
  programming language statements with database access statements. This
  was first delivered in IBM COBOL and PL/I and, much later, in SQL/J
  which implements embedded SQL for Java. Embedded SQL is processed by
  preprocessors that translate the embedded SQL statements into direct
  calls to data access APIs. Whatever the syntax used in the client
  program, the end result is a sequence of calls to the DBMS data access
  APIs. Calls made to these APIs are marshaled by the DBMS client
  component and sent to the DBMS over some communications protocol. The
  protocols are usually proprietary and often undocumented. In the past,
  there have been several efforts to standardize client-to-database
  communication protocols, with Open Group DRDA being perhaps the best
  known, but none have achieved broad adoption.
\item
  A \emph{DBMS Worker} is the thread of execution in the DBMS that does
  work on behalf of a DBMS Client. A 1:1 mapping exists between a DBMS
  worker and a DBMS Client: the DBMS worker handles all SQL requests
  from a single DBMS Client. The DBMS client sends SQL requests to the
  DBMS server. The worker executes each request and returns the result
  to the client. In what follows, we investigate the different
  approaches commercial DBMSs use to map DBMS workers onto OS threads or
  processes. When the distinction is significant, we will refer to them
  as \emph{worker threads} or \emph{worker} \emph{processes.} Otherwise,
  we refer to them simply as workers or DBMS workers.
\end{itemize}

\hypertarget{uniprocessors-and-lightweight-threads}{%
\section{Uniprocessors and Lightweight
Threads}\label{uniprocessors-and-lightweight-threads}}

In this subsection, we outline a simplified DBMS process model taxonomy.
Few leading DBMSs are architected exactly as described in this section,
but the material forms the basis from which we will discuss current
generation production systems in more detail. Each of the leading
database systems today is, at its core, an extension or enhancement of
at least one of the models presented here.

We start by making two simplifying assumptions (which we will relax in
subsequent sections):

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\item
  \emph{OS thread support:} We assume that the OS provides us with
  efficient support for kernel threads and that a process can have a
  very large number of threads. We also assume that the memory overhead
  of each thread is small and that the context switches are inexpensive.
  This is arguably true on a number of modern OS today, but was
  certainly not true when most DBMSs were first designed. Because OS
  threads either were not available or scaled poorly on some platforms,
  many DBMSs are implemented without using the underlying OS thread
  support.
\item
  \emph{Uniprocessor hardware:} We will assume that we are designing for
  a single machine with a single CPU. Given the ubiquity of multi-core
  systems, this is an unrealistic assumption even at the low end. This
  assumption, however, will simplify our initial discussion.
\end{enumerate}

In this simplified context, a DBMS has three natural process model
options. From the simplest to the most complex, these are: (1)
\emph{process} \emph{per DBMS worker}, (2) \emph{thread per DBMS
worker}, and (3) \emph{process pool}. Although these models are
simplified, all three are in use by commercial DBMS systems today.

\hypertarget{process-per-dbms-worker}{%
\subsection{Process per DBMS
Worker}\label{process-per-dbms-worker}}

The \emph{process per DBMS worker} model (\autoref{fig-2-1}) was used by early
DBMS implementations and is still used by many commercial systems today.
This model is relatively easy to implement since DBMS workers are mapped
directly onto OS processes. The OS scheduler manages the timesharing of
DBMS workers and the DBMS programmer can rely on OS protection
facilities to isolate standard bugs like memory overruns. Moreover,
various programming tools like debuggers and memory checkers are
well-suited to this process model. Complicating this model are the
in-memory data structures that are shared across DBMS connections,
including the lock table and buffer pool (discussed in more detail in
Sections 6.3 and 5.3, respectively). These shared data structures must
be explicitly allocated in OS-supported shared memory accessible across
all DBMS processes. This requires OS support (which is widely available)
and some special DBMS coding. In practice, the required extensive use of shared memory in this model reduces some of
the advantages of address space separation, given that a good fraction
of ``interesting'' memory is shared across processes.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=4.66667in,height=3.19236in]{./media/image2.jpeg}

\caption{Process per DBMS worker model: each DBMS worker is implemented
as an OS process.\label{fig-2-1}}
\end{figure}

In terms of scaling to very large numbers of concurrent connections,
\emph{process per DBMS worker} is not the most attractive process model.
The scaling issues arise because a process has more state than a thread
and consequently consumes more memory. A process switch requires
switching security context, memory manager state, file and network
handle tables, and other process context. This is not needed with a
thread switch. Nonetheless, the \emph{process per DBMS worker} model
remains popular and is supported by IBM DB2, PostgreSQL, and Oracle.

\hypertarget{thread-per-dbms-worker}{%
\subsection{Thread per DBMS Worker}\label{thread-per-dbms-worker}}

In the \emph{thread per DBMS worker} model (\autoref{fig-2-2}), a single
multi-threaded process hosts all the DBMS worker activity. A dispatcher
thread (or a small handful of such threads) listens for new DBMS client
connections. Each connection is allocated a new thread. As each client
submits SQL requests, the request is executed entirely by its
corresponding thread running a DBMS worker. This thread runs within the
DBMS process and, once complete, the result is returned to the client
and the thread waits on the connection for the next request from that
same client.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=4.5in,height=3.27292in]{./media/image3.jpeg}

\caption{Thread per DBMS worker model: each DBMS worker is implemented
as an OS thread.\label{fig-2-2}}
\end{figure}

The usual multi-threaded programming challenges arise in this
architecture: the OS does not protect threads from each other's memory
overruns and stray pointers; debugging is tricky, especially with race
conditions; and the software can be difficult to port across OS due to
differences in threading interfaces and multi-threaded scaling. Many of
the multi-programming challenges of the \emph{thread per DBMS worker}
model are also found in the \emph{process per DBMS worker} model due to
the extensive use of shared memory.

Although thread API differences across OSs have been minimized in recent
years, subtle distinctions across platforms still cause hassles in
debugging and tuning. Ignoring these implementation difficulties, the
\emph{thread per DBMS worker} model scales well to large numbers of
concurrent connections and is used in some current-generation
production DBMS systems, including IBM DB2, Microsoft SQL Server, MySQL,
Informix, and Sybase.

\hypertarget{process-pool}{%
\subsection{Process Pool}\label{process-pool}}

This model is a variant of \emph{process per DBMS worker}. Recall that
the advantage of \emph{process per DBMS worker} was its implementation
simplicity. But the memory overhead of each connection requiring a full
process is a clear disadvantage. With \emph{process pool} (\autoref{fig-2-3}),
rather than allocating a full process per DBMS worker, they are hosted
by a pool of processes. A central process holds all DBMS client
connections and, as each SQL request comes in from a client, the request
is given to one of the processes in the \emph{process pool}. The SQL
Statement is executed through to completion, the result is returned to
the database client, and the process is returned to the pool to be
allocated to the next request. The \emph{process pool} size is bounded
and often fixed. If a request comes in
and all processes are already servicing other requests, the new request
must wait for a process to become available.

\begin{figure}
\includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{./media/image4.jpeg}

\caption{Process Pool: each DBMS Worker is allocated to one of a pool of
OS processes as work requests arrive from the Client and the process is
returned to the pool once the request is processed.\label{fig-2-3}}
\end{figure}

\emph{Process pool} has all of the advantages of p\emph{rocess per DBMS
worker} but, since a much smaller number of processes are required, is
considerably more memory efficient. \emph{Process pool} is often
implemented with a dynamically resizable \emph{process pool} where the
pool grows potentially to some maximum number when a large number of
concurrent requests arrive. When the request load is lighter, the
\emph{process pool} can be reduced to fewer waiting processes. As with
\emph{thread per DBMS worker}, the \emph{process pool} model is also
supported by a several current generation DBMS in use today.

\hypertarget{shared-data-and-process-boundaries}{%
\subsection{Shared Data and Process
Boundaries}\label{shared-data-and-process-boundaries}}

All models described above aim to execute concurrent client requests as
independently as possible. Yet, full DBMS worker independence and
isolation is not possible, since they are operating on the same shared
database. In the \emph{thread per DBMS worker} model, data sharing is
easy with all threads run in the same address space. In other models,
shared memory is used for shared data structures and state. In all three
models, data must be moved from the DBMS to the clients. This implies
that all SQL requests need to be moved into the server processes and
that all results for return to the client need to be moved back out. How
is this done? The short answer is that various buffers are used. The two
major types are disk I/O buffers and client communication buffers. We
describe these buffers here, and briefly discuss policies for managing
them.

\emph{Disk I/O buffers}: The most common cross-worker data dependencies
are reads and writes to the shared data store. Consequently, I/O
interactions between DBMS workers are common. There are two separate
disk I/O scenarios to consider: (1) database requests and (2) log
requests.

\begin{itemize}
\item
  \emph{Database I/O Requests: The Buffer Pool}. All persistent database
  data is staged through the DBMS \emph{buffer pool} (Section 5.3). With
  \emph{thread per DBMS worker}, the buffer pool is simply a
  heap-resident data structure available to all threads in the shared
  DBMS address space. In the other two models, the buffer pool is
  allocated in shared memory available to all processes. The end result
  in all three DBMS models is that the buffer pool is a large shared
  data structure available to all database threads and/or processes.
  When a thread needs a page to be read in from the database, it
  generates an I/O request specifying the disk address, and a handle to
  a free memory location (\emph{frame}) in the buffer pool where the
  result can be placed. To flush a buffer pool page to disk, a thread
  generates an I/O request that includes the page's current frame in the
  buffer pool, and its destination address on disk. Buffer pools are
  discussed in more detail in Section 4.3.
\item
  \emph{Log I/O Requests: The Log Tail}. The database log (Section 6.4)
  is an array of entries stored on one or more disks. As log entries are
  generated during transaction processing, they are staged to an
  in-memory queue that is periodically flushed to the log disk(s) in
  FIFO order. This queue is usually called the \emph{log tail}. In many
  systems, a separate process or thread is responsible for periodically
  flushing the log tail to the disk.

With \emph{thread per DBMS worker}, the log tail is simply a
heap-resident data structure. In the other two models, two different
design choices are common. In one approach, a separate process manages
the log. Log records are communicated to the log manager by shared
memory or any other efficient inter-process communications protocol. In
the other approach, the log tail is allocated in shared memory in much
the same way as the buffer pool was handled above. The key point is that
all threads and/or processes executing database client requests need to
be able to request that log records be written and that the log tail be
flushed.

An important type of log flush is the commit transaction flush. A
transaction cannot be reported as successfully committed until a commit
log record is flushed to the log device. This means that client code
waits until the commit log record is flushed, and that DBMS server code
must hold all resources (e.g., locks) until that time as well. Log flush
requests may be postponed for a time to allow the batching of commit
records in a single I/O request (``group commit'').
\end{itemize}

\emph{Client communication buffers}: SQL is typically used in a ``pull''
model: clients consume result tuples from a query cursor by repeatedly
issuing the SQL \texttt{FETCH} request, which retrieve one or more tuples per
request. Most DBMSs try to work ahead of the stream of FETCH requests to
enqueue results in advance of client requests.

In order to support this prefetching behavior, the DBMS worker may use
the client communications socket as a queue for the tuples it produces.
More complex approaches implement client-side cursor caching and use the
DBMS client to store results likely to be fetched in the near future
rather than relying on the OS communications buffers.

\emph{Lock table}: The lock table is shared by all DBMS workers and is
used by the Lock Manager (Section 6.3) to implement database locking
semantics. The techniques for sharing the lock table are the same as
those of the buffer pool and these same techniques can be used to
support any other shared data structures needed by the DBMS
implementation.

\hypertarget{dbms-threads}{%
\section{DBMS Threads}\label{dbms-threads}}

The previous section provided a simplified description of DBMS process
models. We assumed the availability of high-performance OS threads and
that the DBMS would target only uniprocessor systems. In the remainder
of this section, we relax the first of those assumptions and describe
the impact on DBMS implementations. Multi-processing and parallelism are
discussed in the next section.

\hypertarget{dbms-threads-1}{%
\subsection{DBMS Threads}\label{dbms-threads-1}}

Most of today's DBMSs have their roots in research systems from the
1970s and commercialization efforts from the 1980s. Standard OS features
that we take for granted today were often unavailable to DBMS developers
when the original database systems were built. Efficient, high-scale OS
thread support is perhaps the most significant of these. It was not
until the 1990s that OS threads were widely implemented and, where they
did exist, the implementations varied greatly. Even today, some OS
thread implementations do not scale well enough to support all DBMS
workloads well {[}31, 48, 93, 94{]}.

Hence for legacy, portability, and scalability reasons, many widely used
DBMS do not depend upon OS threads in their implementations. Some avoid
threads altogether and use the \emph{process per DBMS} \emph{worker} or
the \emph{process pool} model. Those implementing the remaining process
model choice, the \emph{thread per DBMS worker} model, need a solution
for those OS without good kernel thread implementations. One means of
addressing this problem adopted by several leading DBMSs
was to implement their own proprietary, lightweight thread package.
These lightweight threads, or DBMS threads, replace the role of the OS
threads described in the previous section. Each DBMS thread is
programmed to manage its own state, to perform all potentially blocking
operations (e.g., I/Os) via non-blocking, asynchronous interfaces, and
to frequently yield control to a scheduling routine that dispatches
among these tasks.

Lightweight threads are an old idea that is discussed in a retrospective
sense in {[}49{]}, and are widely used in event-loop programming for
user interfaces. The concept has been revisited frequently in the recent
OS literature {[}31, 48, 93, 94{]}. This architecture provides fast
task-switching and ease of porting, at the expense of replicating a good
deal of OS logic in the DBMS (task-switching, thread state management,
scheduling, etc.) {[}86{]}.

\hypertarget{standard-practice}{%
\section{Standard Practice}\label{standard-practice}}

In leading DBMSs today, we find representatives of all three of the
architectures we introduced in Section 2.1 and some interesting
variations thereof. In this dimension, IBM DB2 is perhaps the most
interesting example in that it supports four distinct process models. On
OSs with good thread support, DB2 defaults to \emph{thread per DBMS
worker} and optionally supports \emph{DBMS workers multiplexed over a
thread pool}. When running on OSs without scalable thread support, DB2
defaults to \emph{process per DBMS worker} and optionally supports
\emph{DBMS worker} \emph{multiplexed over a process pool}.

Summarizing the process models supported by IBM DB2, MySQL, Oracle,
PostgreSQL, and Microsoft SQL Server:

\paragraph{Process per DBMS worker:}

This is the most straight-forward process model and is still heavily
used today. DB2 defaults to \emph{process per DBMS worker} on OSs that
do not support high quality, scalable OS threads and \emph{thread per
DBMS worker} on those that do. This is also the default Oracle process
model. Oracle also supports \emph{process pool} as described below as an
optional model. PostgreSQL runs the \emph{process per DBMS worker} model
exclusively on all supported operating systems.

\paragraph{Thread per DBMS worker:} This is an efficient model with two
major variants in use today:

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\item
  \emph{OS thread per DBMS worker:} IBM DB2 defaults to this model when
  running on systems with good OS thread support and this is the model
  used by MySQL.
\item
  \emph{DBMS thread per DBMS worker:} In this model, DBMS workers are
  scheduled by a lightweight thread scheduler on either OS processes or
  OS threads. This model avoids any potential OS scheduler scaling or
  performance problems at the expense of high implementation costs, poor
  development tools support, and substantial long-standing software
  maintenance costs for the DBMS vendor. There are two main
  sub-categories of this model:

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\alph{enumi}.}

	\item
	\emph{DBMS} \emph{threads scheduled on OS process}:
A lightweight thread scheduler is hosted by one or more OS processes.
Sybase supports this model as does Informix. All current generation
systems using this model implement a DBMS thread scheduler that
schedules DBMS workers over multiple OS processes to exploit multiple
processors. However, not all DBMSs using this model have implemented
\emph{thread migration}: the ability to reassign an existing DBMS thread
to a different OS process (e.g., for load balancing).

\item
  \emph{DBMS threads scheduled on OS threads}: Microsoft SQL Server
  supports this model as a non-default option (default is \emph{DBMS
  workers multiplexed over} \emph{a thread pool} described below). This
  SQL Server option, called \emph{Fibers}, is used in some high scale
  transaction processing benchmarks but, otherwise, is in fairly light
  use.
\end{enumerate}
\end{enumerate}

\paragraph{Process/thread pool:}

In this model, DBMS workers are multiplexed over a pool of processes. As
OS thread support has improved, a second variant of this model
has emerged based upon a \emph{thread pool} rather than a \emph{process
pool}. In this latter model, DBMS workers are multiplexed over a pool of
OS threads:

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\item
  \emph{DBMS workers multiplexed over a process pool:} This model is
  much more memory efficient than \emph{process per DBMS} \emph{worker},
  is easy to port to OSs without good OS thread support, and scales
  very well to large numbers of users. This is the optional model
  supported by Oracle and the one they recommend for systems with large
  numbers of concurrently connected users. The Oracle default model is
  \emph{process per DBMS} \emph{worker}. Both of the options supported
  by Oracle are easy to support on the vast number of different OSs they
  target (at one point Oracle supported over 80 target OSs).
\item
  \emph{DBMS workers multiplexed over a thread pool:} Microsoft SQL
  Server defaults to this model and over 99\% of the SQL Server
  installations run this way. To efficiently support tens of thousands
  of concurrently connected users, as mentioned above, SQL Server
  optionally supports \emph{DBMS threads scheduled on OS threads}.
\end{enumerate}

As we discuss in the next section, most current generation commercial
DBMSs support intra-query parallelism: the ability to execute all or
parts of a single query on multiple processors in parallel. For the
purposes of our discussion in this section, intra-query parallelism is
the temporary assignment of multiple DBMS workers to a single SQL query.
The underlying process model is not impacted by this feature in any way
other than that a single client connection may have more than a single
DBMS worker executing on its behalf.

\hypertarget{admission-control}{%
\section{Admission Control}\label{admission-control}}

We close this section with one remaining issue related to supporting
multiple concurrent requests. As the workload in any multi-user system
increases, throughput will increase up to some maximum. Beyond this
point, it will begin to decrease radically as the system starts to
thrash. As with OSs, thrashing is often the result of memory pressure:
the DBMS cannot keep the ``working set'' of database pages in the buffer
pool, and spends all its time replacing pages. In DBMSs, this is
particularly a problem with query processing techniques like sorting and
hash joins that tend to consume large amounts of main memory. In some
cases, DBMS thrashing can also occur due to contention for locks:
transactions continually deadlock with each other and need to be rolled
back and restarted {[}2{]}. Hence any good multi-user system has an
\emph{admission} \emph{control} policy, which does not accept new work
unless sufficient DBMS resources are available. With a good admission
controller, a system will display \emph{graceful degradation} under
overload: transaction latencies will increase proportionally to the
arrival rate, but throughput will remain at peak.

Admission control for a DBMS can be done in two tiers. First, a simple
admission control policy may be in the dispatcher process to ensure that
the number of client connections is kept below a threshold. This serves
to prevent overconsumption of basic resources like network connections.
In some DBMSs this control is not provided, under the assumption that it
is handled by another tier of a multi-tier system, e.g., application
servers, transaction processing monitors, or web servers.

The second layer of admission control must be implemented directly
within the core DBMS relational query processor. This \emph{execution}
admission controller runs after the query is parsed and optimized, and
determines whether a query is postponed, begins execution with fewer
resources, or begins execution without additional constraints. The
execution admission controller is aided by information from the query
optimizer that estimates the resources that a query will require and the
current availability of system resources. In particular, the optimizer's
query plan can specify (1) the disk devices that the query will access,
and an estimate of the number of random and sequential I/Os per device,
(2) estimates of the CPU load of the query based on the operators in the
query plan and the number of tuples to be processed, and, most
importantly (3) estimates about the memory footprint of the query data
structures, including space for sorting and hashing large inputs during
joins and other query execution tasks. As noted above, this last metric
is often the key for an admission controller, since memory pressure is
typically the main cause of thrashing. Hence many DBMSs use memory
footprint and the number of active DBMS workers as the main criterion
for admission control.

\hypertarget{discussion-and-additional-material}{%
\section{Discussion and Additional
Material}\label{discussion-and-additional-material}}

Process model selection has a substantial influence on DBMS scaling and
portability. As a consequence, three of the more broadly used commercial
systems each support more than one process model across their product
line. From an engineering perspective, it would clearly be much simpler
to employ a single process model across all OSs and at all scaling
levels. But, due to the vast diversity of usage patterns and the
non-uniformity of the target OSs, each of these three DBMSs have elected
to support multiple models.

Looking forward, there has been significant interest in recent years in
new process models for server systems, motivated by changes in hardware
bottlenecks, and by the scale and variability of workload on the
Internet well {[}31, 48, 93, 94{]}. One theme emerging in these designs
is to break down a server system into a set of independently scheduled
``engines,'' with messages passed asynchronously and in bulk between
these engines. This is something like the ``process pool'' model above,
in that worker units are reused across multiple requests. The main
novelty in this recent research is to break the functional granules of
work in a more narrowly scoped task-specific manner than was done
before. This results in many-to-many relationship between workers and
SQL requests --- a single query is processed via activities in
\emph{multiple} workers, and each worker does its own specialized tasks
for \emph{many} SQL requests. This architecture enables more flexible
scheduling choices --- e.g., it allows dynamic trade-offs between
allowing a single worker to complete tasks for many queries (perhaps to
improve overall system throughput), or to allow a query to make progress
among multiple workers (to improve that query's latency). In some cases
this has been shown to have advantages in processor cache locality, and
in the ability to keep the CPU busy from idling during cache misses in
hardware. Further investigation of this idea in the DBMS context is
typified by the StagedDB research project {[}35{]}, which is a good
starting point for additional reading.

\hypertarget{parallel-architecture-processes-and-memory-coordination}{%
\chapter{Parallel Architecture: Processes and Memory
Coordination}\label{parallel-architecture-processes-and-memory-coordination}}
\chaptermark{Parallel Architecture}

Parallel hardware is a fact of life in modern servers and comes in a
variety of configurations. In this section, we summarize the standard
DBMS terminology (introduced in {[}87{]}), and discuss the process
models and memory coordination issues in each.

\hypertarget{shared-memory}{%
\section{Shared Memory}\label{shared-memory}}

A \emph{shared-memory} parallel system (\autoref{fig-3-1}) is one in which all
processors can access the same RAM and disk with roughly the same
performance. This architecture is fairly standard today --- most server
hardware ships with between two and eight processors. High-end machines
can ship with dozens of processors, but tend to be sold at a large
premium relative to the processing resources provided. Highly parallel
shared-memory machines are one of the last remaining ``cash cows'' in
the hardware industry, and are used heavily in high-end online
transaction processing applications. The cost of server hardware is
usually dwarfed by costs of administering the systems, so the expense of
buying a smaller number of large, very expensive systems is sometimes
viewed to be an acceptable trade-off.
\footnote{The dominant cost for DBMS customers is typically paying qualified
people to administer high-end systems. This includes Database
Administrators (DBAs) who configure and maintain the DBMS, and System
Administrators who configure and maintain the hardware and operating
systems.}

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=3.83333in,height=2.61319in]{./media/image5.jpeg}

\caption{Shared-memory architecture.\label{fig-3-1}}
\end{figure}

Multi-core processors support multiple processing cores on a single
chip and share some infrastructure such as caches and the memory bus.
This makes them quite similar to a shared-memory architecture in terms
of their programming model. Today, nearly all serious database
deployments involve multiple processors, with each processor having more
than one CPU. DBMS architectures need to be able to fully exploit this
potential parallelism. Fortunately, all three of the DBMS architectures
described in Section 2 run well on modern shared-memory hardware
architectures.

The process model for shared-memory machines follows quite naturally
from the uniprocessor approach. In fact, most database systems evolved
from their initial uniprocessor implementations to shared-memory
implementations. On shared-memory machines, the OS typically supports
the transparent assignment of workers (processes or
threads) across the processors, and the shared data structures continue
to be accessible to all. All three models run well on these systems and
support the execution of multiple, independent SQL requests in parallel.
The main challenge is to modify the query execution layers to take
advantage of the ability to parallelize a single query across multiple
CPUs; we defer this to Section 5.

\hypertarget{shared-nothing}{%
\section{Shared-Nothing}\label{shared-nothing}}

A \emph{shared-nothing} parallel system (\autoref{fig-3-2}) is made up of a
cluster of independent machines that communicate over a high-speed
network interconnect or, increasingly frequently, over commodity
networking components. There is no way for a given system to directly
access the memory or disk of another system.

Shared-nothing systems provide no hardware sharing abstractions, leaving
coordination of the various machines entirely in the hands of the DBMS.
The most common technique employed by DBMSs to support these clusters is
to run their standard process model on each machine, or node, in the
cluster. Each node is capable of accepting client SQL
requests, accessing necessary metadata, compiling SQL requests, and
performing data access just as on a single shared memory system as
described above. The main difference is that each system in the cluster
stores only a portion of the data. Rather than running the queries they
receive against their local data only, the requests are sent to other
members of the cluster and all machines involved execute the query in
parallel against the data they are storing. The tables are spread over
multiple systems in the cluster using \emph{horizontal data
partitioning} to allow each processor to execute independently of the
others.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=4.16667in,height=2.79167in]{./media/image6.jpeg}

\caption{Shared-nothing architecture.\label{fig-3-2}}
\end{figure}

Each tuple in the database is assigned to an individual machine, and
hence each table is sliced ``horizontally'' and spread across the
machines. Typical data partitioning schemes include hash-based
partitioning by tuple attribute, range-based partitioning by tuple
attribute, round-robin, and hybrid which is a combination of both
range-based and hash-based. Each individual machine is responsible for
the access, locking and logging of the data on its local disks. During
query execution, the query optimizer chooses how to horizontally
re-partition tables and intermediate results across the machines to
satisfy the query, and it assigns each machine a logical partition of
the work. The query executors on the various machines ship data requests
and tuples to each other, but do not need to transfer any thread state
or other low-level information. As a result of this value-based
partitioning of the database tuples, minimal coordination is required in
these systems. Good partitioning of the data is required, however, for
good performance. This places a significant burden on the Database
Administrator (DBA) to lay out tables intelligently, and on the query
optimizer to do a good job partitioning the workload.

This simple partitioning solution does not handle all issues in the
DBMS. For example, explicit cross-processor coordination must take place
to handle transaction completion, provide load balancing, and support
certain maintenance tasks. For example, the processors must exchange
explicit control messages for issues like distributed deadlock detection
and two-phase commit {[}30{]}. This requires additional logic, and can
be a performance bottleneck if not done carefully.

Also, \emph{partial failure} is a possibility that has to be managed in
a shared-nothing system. In a shared-memory system, the failure of a
processor typically results in shutdown of the entire machine, and hence
the entire DBMS. In a shared-nothing system, the failure of a single
node will not necessarily affect other nodes in the cluster. But it will
certainly affect the overall behavior of the DBMS, since the failed node
hosts some fraction of the data in the database. There are at least
three possible approaches in this scenario. The first is to bring down
all nodes if any node fails; this in essence emulates what would happen
in a shared-memory system. The second approach, which Informix dubbed
``Data Skip,'' allows queries to be executed on any nodes that are up,
``skipping'' the data on the failed node. This is useful in scenarios
where data \emph{availability} is more important than completeness of
results. But best-effort results do not have well-defined semantics, and
for many workloads this is not a useful choice --- particularly because
the DBMS is often used as the ``repository of record'' in a multi-tier
system, and availability-vs-consistency trade-offs tend to get done in a
higher tier (often in an application server). The third approach is to
employ redundancy schemes ranging from full database failover (requiring
double the number of machines and software licenses) to fine-grain
redundancy like \emph{chained declustering} {[}43{]}. In this latter
technique, tuple copies are spread across multiple nodes in the cluster.
The advantage of chained declustering over simpler schemes is that (a)
it requires fewer machines to be deployed to guarantee availability than
na\"ive schemes, and (b) when a node does fails, the system load is
distributed fairly evenly over the remaining nodes: the $n - 1$
remaining nodes each do $n / (n - 1)$ of the
original work, and this form of linear degradation in performance
continues as nodes fail. In practice, most current generation commercial
systems are somewhere in the middle, neither as coarse-grained as full
database redundancy nor as fine-grained as chained declustering

The shared-nothing architecture is fairly common today, and has
unbeatable scalability and cost characteristics. It is mostly used at
the extreme high end, typically for decision-support applications and
data warehouses. In an interesting combination of hardware
architectures, a shared-nothing cluster is often made up of many nodes
each of which is a shared-memory multi-processors.

\hypertarget{shared-disk}{%
\section{Shared-Disk}\label{shared-disk}}

A \emph{shared-disk} parallel system (\autoref{fig-3-3}) is one in which all
processors can access the disks with about the same performance, but are
unable to access each other's RAM. This architecture is quite common
with two prominent examples being Oracle RAC and DB2 for zSeries
SYSPLEX. Shared-disk has become more common in recent years with the
increasing popularity of Storage Area Networks (SAN). A SAN allows one
or more logical disks to be mounted by one or more host systems making
it easy to create shared disk configurations.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=4.66667in,height=2.08333in]{./media/image7.jpeg}

\caption{Shared-disk architecture.\label{fig-3-3}}
\end{figure}

One potential advantage of shared-disk over shared-nothing systems is
their lower cost of administration. DBAs of shared-disk systems do not
have to consider partitioning tables across machines in order to achieve
parallelism. But very large databases still typically do require
partitioning so, at this scale, the difference becomes less pronounced.
Another compelling feature of the shared-disk architecture is that the
failure of a single DBMS processing node does not affect the other
nodes' ability to access the entire database. This is in contrast to
both shared-memory systems that fail as a unit, and shared-nothing
systems that lose access to at least some data upon a node failure
(unless some alternative data redundancy scheme is used). However, even
with these advantages, shared-disk systems are still vulnerable to some
single
points of failure. If the data is damaged or otherwise corrupted by
hardware or software failure before reaching the storage subsystem,
then all nodes in the system will have access to only this corrupt page.
If the storage subsystem is using RAID or other data redundancy
techniques, the corrupt page will be redundantly stored but still
corrupt in all copies.

Because no partitioning of the data is required in a shared-disk system,
data can be copied into RAM and modified on multiple machines. Unlike
shared-memory systems, there is no natural memory location to coordinate
this sharing of the data --- each machine has its own local memory for
locks and buffer pool pages. Hence explicit coordination of data sharing
across the machines is needed. Shared-disk systems depend upon a
distributed lock manager facility, and a \emph{cache-coherency} protocol
for managing the distributed buffer pools {[}8{]}. These are complex
software components, and can be bottlenecks for workloads with
significant contention. Some systems such as the IBM zSeries SYSPLEX
implement the lock manager in a hardware subsystem.

\hypertarget{numa}{%
\section{NUMA}\label{numa}}

\emph{Non-Uniform Memory Access (NUMA)} systems provide a shared-memory
programming model over a cluster of systems with independent memories.
Each system in the cluster can access its own local memory quickly,
whereas remote memory access across the high-speed cluster interconnect
is somewhat delayed. The architecture name comes from this
non-uniformity of memory access times.

NUMA hardware architectures are an interesting middle ground between
shared-nothing and shared-memory systems. They are much easier to
program than shared-nothing clusters, and also scale to more processors
than shared-memory systems by avoiding shared points of contention such
as shared-memory buses.

NUMA clusters have not been broadly successful commercially but one area
where NUMA design concepts have been adopted is shared memory
multi-processors (Section 3.1). As shared memory multi-processors have
scaled up to larger numbers of processors, they have shown increasing
non-uniformity in their memory architectures.

Often the memory of large shared memory multi-processors is divided into
sections and each section is associated with a small subset of the
processors in the system. Each combined subset of memory and CPUs is
often referred to as a pod. Each processor can access local pod memory
slightly faster than remote pod memory. This use of the NUMA design
pattern has allowed shared memory systems to scale to very large numbers
of processors. As a consequence, NUMA shared memory multi-processors are
now very common whereas NUMA clusters have never achieved any
significant market share.

One way that DBMSs can run on NUMA shared memory systems is by ignoring
the non-uniformity of memory access. This works acceptably provided the
non-uniformity is minor. When the ratio of near-memory to far-memory
access times rises above the 1.5:1 to 2:1 range, the DBMS needs to
employ optimizations to avoid serious memory access bottlenecks. These
optimizations come in a variety of forms, but all follow the same basic
approach: (a) when allocating memory for use by a processor, use memory
local to that processor (avoid use of far memory) and (b) ensure that a
given DBMS worker is always scheduled if possible on the same hardware
processor it was on previously. This combination allows DBMS workloads
to run well on high scale, shared memory systems having some
non-uniformity of memory access times.

Although NUMA clusters have all but disappeared, the programming model
and optimization techniques remain important to current generation DBMS
systems since many high-scale shared memory systems have significant
non-uniformity in their memory access performance.

\hypertarget{dbms-threads-and-multi-processors}{%
\section{DBMS Threads and
Multi-processors}\label{dbms-threads-and-multi-processors}}

One potential problem that arises from implementing \emph{thread per
DBMS} \emph{worker} using DBMS threads becomes immediately apparent when
we remove the last of our two simplifying assumptions from Section 2.1,
that of uniprocessor hardware. The natural implementation of the
lightweight DBMS thread package described in Section 2.2.1 is one where
all threads run within a single OS process. Unfortunately, a single
process can only be executed on one processor at a time. So, on a
multi-processor system, the DBMS would only be using a single processor
at a time and would leave the rest of the system idle. The early Sybase
SQL Server architecture suffered this limitation. As shared memory
multi-processors became more popular in the early 90s, Sybase quickly
made architectural changes to exploit multiple OS processes.

When running DBMS threads within multiple processes, there will be times
when one process has the bulk of the work and other processes (and
therefore processors) are idle. To make this model work well under these
circumstances, DBMSs must implement thread migration between processes.
Informix did an excellent job of this starting with the Version 6.0
release.

When mapping DBMS threads to multiple OS processes, decisions need to be
made about how many OS processes to employ, how to allocate the DBMS
threads to OS threads, and how to distribute across multiple OS
processes. A good rule of thumb is to have one process per physical
processor. This maximizes the physical parallelism inherent in the
hardware while minimizing the per-process memory overhead.

\hypertarget{standard-practice-1}{%
\section{Standard Practice}\label{standard-practice-1}}

With respect to support for parallelism, the trend is similar to that of
the last section: most of the major DBMSs support multiple models of
parallelism. Due to the commercial popularity of shared-memory systems
(SMPs, multi-core systems and combinations of both), shared-memory
parallelism is well-supported by all major DBMS vendors. Where we start
to see divergence in support is in multi-node cluster parallelism where
the broad design choices are shared-disk and shared-nothing.

\begin{itemize}

\item
  \emph{Shared-Memory:} All major commercial DBMS providers
support shared memory parallelism including: IBM DB2, Oracle, and
Microsoft SQL Server.
\item
  \emph{Shared-Nothing:} This model is supported by IBM DB2, Informix,
  Tandem, and NCR Teradata among others; Greenplum offers a custom
  version of PostgreSQL that supports shared-nothing parallelism.
\item
  \emph{Shared-Disk:} This model is supported by Oracle RAC, RDB
  (acquired by Oracle from Digital Equipment Corp.), and IBM DB2 for
  zSeries amongst others.
\end{itemize}

IBM sells multiple different DBMS products, and chose to implement
shared disk support in some and shared nothing in others. Thus far, none
of the leading commercial systems have support for both shared-nothing
and shared-disk in a single code base; Microsoft SQL Server has
implemented neither.

\hypertarget{discussion-and-additional-material-1}{%
\section{Discussion and Additional
Material}\label{discussion-and-additional-material-1}}

The designs above represent a selection of hardware/software
architecture models used in a variety of server systems. While they were
largely pioneered in DBMSs, these ideas are gaining increasing currency
in other data-intensive domains, including lower-level programmable
data-processing backends like Map-Reduce {[}12{]} that are increasing
users for a variety of custom data analysis tasks. However, even as
these ideas are influencing computing more broadly, new questions are
arising in the design of parallelism for database systems.

One key challenge for parallel software architectures in the next decade
arises from the desire to exploit the new generation of ``many-core''
architectures that are coming from the processor vendors. These devices
will introduce a new hardware design point, with dozens, hundreds or
even thousands of processing units on a single chip, communicating via
high-speed on-chip networks, but retaining many of the existing
bottlenecks with respect to accessing off-chip memory and disk. This
will result in new imbalances and bottlenecks in the memory path between
disk and processors, which will almost certainly require DBMS
architectures to be re-examined to meet the performance potential of the
hardware.

A somewhat related architectural shift is being foreseen on a more
``macro'' scale, in the realm of services-oriented computing. Here, the
idea is that large datacenters with tens of thousands of computers will
host processing (hardware and software) for users. At this scale,
application and server administration is only affordable if highly
automated. No administrative task can scale with the number of servers.
And, since less reliable commodity servers are typically used and
failures are more common, recovery from common failures needs to be
fully automated. In services at scale there will be disk failures every
day and several server failures each week. In this environment,
administrative database backup is typically replaced by redundant online
copies of the entire database maintained on different servers stored on
different disks. Depending upon the value of the data, the redundant
copy or copies may even be stored in a different datacenter. Automated
offline backup may still be employed to recover from application,
administrative, or user error. However, recovery from most common errors
and failures is a rapid failover to a redundant online copy. Redundancy
can be achieved in a number of ways: (a) replication at the data storage
level (Storage-Area Networks), (b) data replication at the database
storage engine level (as discussed in Section 7.4), (c) redundant
execution of queries by the query processor (Section 6), or (d)
redundant database requests auto-generated at the client software level
(e.g., by web servers or application servers).

At a yet more decoupled level, it is quite common in practice for
multiple servers with DBMS functionality to be deployed in tiers, in an
effort to minimize the I/O request rate to the ``DBMS of record.'' These
schemes include various forms of middle-tier database caches for SQL
queries, including specialized main-memory databases like Oracle
TimesTen, and more traditional databases configured to serve this
purpose (e.g., {[}55{]}). Higher up in the deployment stack, many
object-oriented application-server architectures, supporting programming
models like Enterprise Java Beans, can be configured to do transactional
caching of application objects in concert with a DBMS. However, the
selection, setup and management of these various schemes remains
non-standard and complex, and elegant universally agreed-upon models
have remained elusive.

\hypertarget{relational-query-processor}{%
\chapter{Relational Query Processor}\label{relational-query-processor}}

The previous sections stressed the macro-architectural design issues in
a DBMS. We now begin a sequence of sections discussing design at a
somewhat finer grain, addressing each of the main DBMS components in
turn. Following our discussion in Section 1.1, we start at the top of
the system with the Query Processor, and in subsequent sections move
down into storage management, transactions, and utilities.

A relational query processor takes a declarative SQL statement,
validates it, optimizes it into a procedural dataflow execution plan,
and (subject to admission control) executes that dataflow program on
behalf of a client program. The client program then fetches (``pulls'')
the result tuples, typically one at a time or in small batches. The
major components of a relational query processor are shown in \autoref{fig-1-1}.
In this section, we concern ourselves with both the query processor
and some non-transactional aspects of the storage manager's access
methods. In general, relational query processing can be viewed as a
single-user, single-threaded task. Concurrency control is managed
transparently by lower layers of the system, as described in Section 5.
The only exception to this rule is when the DBMS must explicitly ``pin''
and ``unpin'' buffer pool pages while operating on them so that
they remain resident in memory during brief, critical operations as we
discuss in Section 4.4.5.

In this section we focus on the common-case SQL commands: Data
Manipulation Language (DML) statements including SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE,
and DELETE. Data Definition Language (DDL) statements such as CREATE
TABLE and CREATE INDEX are typically not processed by the query
optimizer. These statements are usually implemented procedurally in
static DBMS logic through explicit calls to the storage engine and
catalog manager (described in Section 6.1). Some products have begun
optimizing a small subset of DDL statements as well and we expect this
trend to continue.

\hypertarget{query-parsing-and-authorization}{%
\section{Query Parsing and
Authorization}\label{query-parsing-and-authorization}}

Given an SQL statement, the main tasks for the SQL Parser are to
  (1) check that the query is correctly specified, (2) resolve names and
  references, (3) convert the query into the internal format used by the
  optimizer, and (4) verify that the user is authorized to execute the
  query. Some DBMSs defer some or all security checking to execution
  time but, even in these systems, the parser is still responsible for
  gathering the data needed for the execution-time security check.

Given an SQL query, the parser first considers each of the table
references in the FROM clause. It canonicalizes table names into a fully
qualified name of the form server.database.schema.table. This is also
called a \emph{four part} name. Systems that do not support queries
spanning multiple servers need only canonicalize to
database.schema.table, and systems that support only one database per
DBMS can canonicalize to just schema.table. This canonicalization is
required since users have context-dependent defaults that allow single
part names to be used in the query specification. Some systems support
multiple names for a table, called \emph{table aliases}, and these must
be substituted with the fully qualified table name as well.

After canonicalizing the table names, the query processor then invokes
the \emph{catalog manager} to check that the table is registered in the
system catalog. It may also cache metadata about the table in internal
query data structures during this step. Based on information about the
table, it then uses the catalog to ensure that attribute references are
correct. The data types of attributes are used to drive the
disambiguation logic for overloaded functional expressions, comparison
operators, and constant expressions. For example, consider the
expression \texttt{(EMP.salary * 1.15) < 75000}. The code for the
multiplication function and comparison operator, and the assumed data
type and internal format of the strings ``1.15'' and ``75000,'' will
depend upon the data type of the EMP.salary attribute. This data type
may be an integer, a floating-point number, or a ``money'' value.
Additional standard SQL syntax checks are also applied, including the
consistent usage of tuple variables, the compatibility of tables
combined via set operators (UNION/INTERSECT/EXCEPT), the usage of
attributes in the SELECT list of aggregation queries, the nesting of
subqueries, and so on.

If the query parses successfully, the next phase is authorization
checking to ensure that the user has appropriate permissions
(SELECT/DELETE/INSERT/UPDATE) on the tables, user defined functions, or
other objects referenced in the query. Some systems perform full
authorization checking during the statement parse phase. This, however,
is not always possible. Systems that support row-level security, for
example, cannot do full security checking until execution time because
the security checks can be data-value dependent. Even when authorization
could theoretically be statically validated at compilation time,
deferring some of this work to query plan execution time has advantages.
Query plans that defer security checking to execution time can be shared
between users and do not require recompilation when security changes. As
a consequence, some portion of security validation is typically deferred
to query plan execution.

It is possible to constraint-check constant expressions during
compilation as well. For example, an UPDATE command may have a clause of
the form \texttt{SET EMP.salary = -1}. If an integrity constraint specifies
positive values for salaries, the query need not even be executed.
Deferring this work to execution time, however, is quite common.

If a query parses and passes validation, then the internal format of the
query is passed on to the query rewrite module for further processing.

\hypertarget{query-rewrite}{%
\section{Query Rewrite}\label{query-rewrite}}

The query rewrite module, or rewriter, is responsible for simplifying
and normalizing the query without changing its semantics. It can rely
only on the query and on metadata in the catalog, and cannot access data
in the tables. Although we speak of ``rewriting'' the query, most
rewriters actually operate on an internal representation of the query,
rather than on the original SQL statement text. The query rewrite module
usually outputs an internal representation of the query in the same
internal format that it accepted at its input.

The rewriter in many commercial systems is a logical component whose
actual implementation is in either the later phases of query parsing or
the early phases of query optimization. In DB2, for example, the
rewriter is a standalone component, whereas in SQL Server the query
rewriting is done as an early phase of the Query Optimizer. Nonetheless,
it is useful to consider the rewriter separately, even if the explicit
architectural boundary does not exist in all systems.

The rewriter's main responsibilities are:

\begin{itemize}
\item
  \emph{View expansion}: Handling views is the rewriter's main
  traditional role. For each view reference that appears in the FROM
  clause, the rewriter retrieves the view definition from the catalog
  manager. It then rewrites the query to (1) replace that view with the
  tables and predicates referenced by the view and (2) substitute any
  references to that view with column references to tables in the view.
  This process is applied recursively until the query is expressed
  exclusively over tables and includes no views. This view expansion
  technique, first proposed for the set-based QUEL language in INGRES
  {[}85{]}, requires some care in SQL to correctly handle duplicate
  elimination, nested queries, NULLs, and other tricky details {[}68{]}.
\item
  \emph{Constant arithmetic evaluation}: Query rewrite can simplify
constant arithmetic expressions: e.g., \texttt{R.x < 10+2+R.y} is
rewritten as \texttt{R.x < 12+R.y}.
\item
  \emph{Logical rewriting of predicates}: Logical rewrites are applied
  based on the predicates and constants in the WHERE clause. Simple
  Boolean logic is often applied to improve the match between
  expressions and the capabilities of index-based access methods. A
  predicate such as \texttt{NOT Emp.Salary > 1000000}, for example,
  may be rewritten as \texttt{Emp.Salary <= 1000000}. These logical
  rewrites can even short-circuit query execution, via simple
		satisfiability tests. The expression \texttt{Emp.salary \textless{} 75000 AND
		Emp.salary \textgreater{} 1000000}, for example, can be replaced with
  FALSE. This might allow the system to return an empty query result
  without accessing the database. Unsatisfiable queries may seem
  implausible, but recall that predicates may be ``hidden'' inside view
  definitions and unknown to the writer of the outer query. The query
  above, for example, may have resulted from a query for underpaid
  employees over a view called ``Executives.'' Unsatisfiable predicates
  also form the basis for ``partition elimination'' in parallel
  installations of Microsoft SQL Server: when a relation is horizontally
  range partitioned across disk volumes via range predicates, the query
  need not be run on a volume if its range-partition predicate is
  unsatisfiable in conjunction with the query predicates.

An additional, important logical rewrite uses the transitivity of
		predicates to induce new predicates \texttt{R.x \textless{} 10 AND R.x = S.y},
		for example, suggests adding the additional predicate ``\texttt{AND S.y
		\textless{} 10}.'' Adding these transitive predicates increases the
ability of the optimizer to choose plans that filter data early in
execution, especially through the use of index-based access methods.
\item
  \emph{Semantic optimization}: In many cases, integrity constraints on
  the schema are stored in the catalog, and can be used to help rewrite
  some queries. An important example of such optimization is
  \emph{redundant join elimination}. This arises when a foreign key
  constraint binds a column of one table (e.g., Emp.deptno) to another
  table (Dept). Given such a foreign key constraint, it is known that
  there is exactly one Dept for each Emp and that the Emp tuple could
  not exist without a corresponding Dept tuple (the parent).

Consider a query that joins the two tables but does not make use of the
Dept columns:

		\begin{verbatim}
SELECT Emp.name, Emp.salary
  FROM Emp, Dept
  WHERE Emp.deptno = Dept.dno
		\end{verbatim}

Such queries can be rewritten to remove the Dept table (assuming
Emp.deptno is constrained to be non-null), and hence the join. Again,
such seemingly implausible scenarios often arise naturally via views. A
user, for example, may submit a query about employee attributes over a
view EMPDEPT that joins those two tables. Database applications such as
Siebel use very wide tables and, where the underlying database does not
support tables of sufficient width, they use multiple tables with a view
over these tables. Without redundant join elimination, this view-based
wide-table implementation would perform very poorly.

Semantic optimizations can also circumvent query execution entirely when
constraints on the tables are incompatible with query predicates.

\item
  \emph{Subquery flattening and other heuristic rewrites}: Query
  optimizers are among the most complex components in current-generation
  commercial DBMSs. To keep that complexity bounded, most optimizers
  operate on individual SELECT-FROM-WHERE query blocks in isolation and
  do not optimize across blocks. So rather than further complicate query
  optimizers, many systems rewrite queries into a form better suited for
  the optimizer. This transformation is sometimes called query
  normalization. One example class of normalizations is to rewrite
  semantically equivalent queries into a canonical form, in an effort to
  ensure that semantically equivalent queries will be optimized to
  produce the same query plan. Another important heuristic is to flatten
  nested queries when possible to maximally expose opportunities for the
  query optimizer's single-block optimizations. This turns out to be
  very tricky in some cases in SQL, due to issues like duplicate
  semantics, subqueries, NULLs, and correlation {[}68, 80{]}. In the
  early days, subquery flattening was a purely heuristic rewrite but
  some products are now basing the rewrite decision on cost-based
  analysis. Other rewrites are possible across query blocks as well.
  Predicate transitivity, for example, can allow predicates to be copied
  across subqueries {[}52{]}. Flattening correlated subqueries is
  especially important to achieve good performance in parallel
  architectures: correlated subqueries result in ``nested-loop'' style
  comparisons across query blocks, which serializes the execution of the
  subqueries despite the availability of parallel resources.
\end{itemize}

\hypertarget{query-optimizer}{%
\section{Query Optimizer}\label{query-optimizer}}

The query optimizer's job is to transform an internal query
representation into an efficient \emph{query plan} for executing the
query (\autoref{fig-4-1}). A query plan can be thought of as a dataflow diagram
that pipes table data through a graph of query \emph{operators}. In many
systems, queries are first broken into SELECT-FROM-WHERE query blocks.
The optimization of each individual query block is then done using
techniques similar to those described in the famous paper by Selinger
\emph{et al.} on the System R optimizer {[}79{]}. On completion, a few
operators are typically added to the top of each query block as
post-processing to compute GROUP BY, ORDER BY, HAVING and DISTINCT
clauses if they exist. The various blocks are then stitched together in
a straightforward fashion.

\begin{figure}
\centering
%\includegraphics[width=4.16667in,height=4.27847in]{./media/image8.jpeg}
\tikzset{EMP/.style={rounded rectangle, minimum width=12em, minimum height=12ex, align=center, draw}}
\centering
\begin{tikzpicture}

  \path (0,0)    node[EMP] (l)  {HeapScan\\EMP}
        (5,0)    node[EMP] (r)  {IndexScan\\DEPT}
        (2.5,3)  node[EMP] (m1) {\\\\IndexJoin}
        (2.5,6)  node[EMP] (m2) {Sort(D.DeptName)}
        (2.5,9)  node[EMP] (m3) {Group By/AVG}
        (2.5,12) node[EMP] (m4) {Sort (AvgSal)};

  \draw (2.2,3) -- (2.2,3.6) -- (2.8,3) -- (2.8,3.6) -- (2.2,3);

  \path[-Latex] (l)  edge (m1)
                (r)  edge (m1)
                (m1) edge (m2)
                (m2) edge (m3)
                (m3) edge (m4);

  \node[align=left,font=\ttfamily] at (8,8) {%
    \verb+  SELECT D.DeptName,+\\
    \verb+         AVG(E.Salary) AS AvgSal+\\
    \verb+    FROM EMP E, DEPT D+\\
    \verb+   WHERE E.Dno = D.DeptID+\\
    \verb+GROUP BY DeptName+\\
    \verb+ORDER BY AvgSal DESC+
  };

  \end{tikzpicture}

\caption{A Query plan. Only the main physical operators are shown.\label{fig-4-1}}
\end{figure}

The resulting query plan can be represented in a number of ways. The
original System R prototype compiled query plans into machine code,
whereas the early INGRES prototype generated an interpretable query
plan. Query interpretation was listed as a ``mistake'' by the INGRES
authors in their retrospective paper in the early 1980's {[}85{]}, but
Moore's law and software engineering have vindicated the INGRES decision
to some degree. Ironically, compiling to machine code is listed by some
researchers on the System R project as a mistake. When the System R code
base was made into a commercial DBMS system
(SQL/DS) the development team's first change was to replace the machine
code executor with an interpreter.

To enable cross-platform portability, every major DBMS now compiles
queries into some kind of interpretable data structure. The only
difference between them is the intermediate form's level of abstraction.
The query plan in some systems is a very lightweight object, not unlike
a relational algebraic expression, that is annotated with the names of
access methods, join algorithms, and so on. Other systems use a
lower-level language of ``op-codes,'' closer in spirit to Java byte
codes than to relational algebraic expressions. For simplicity in our
discussion, we focus on algebra-like query representations in the
remainder of this paper.

Although Selinger's paper is widely considered the ``bible'' of query
optimization, it was preliminary research. All systems extend this work
significantly in a number of dimensions. Among the main extensions are:

\begin{itemize}
\item
  \emph{Plan space}: The System R optimizer constrained its plan space
  somewhat by focusing only on ``left-deep'' query plans (where the
  right-hand input to a join must be a base table), and by ``postponing
  Cartesian products'' (ensuring that Cartesian products appear only
  after all joins in a dataflow). In commercial systems today, it is
  well known that ``bushy'' trees (with nested right-hand inputs) and
  early use of Cartesian products can be useful in some cases. Hence
  both options are considered under some circumstances by most systems.
\item
  \emph{Selectivity estimation}: The selectivity estimation techniques
  in the Selinger paper are based on simple table and index
  cardinalities and are na\"ive by the standards of current generation
  systems. Most systems today analyze and summarize the distributions of
  values in attributes via histograms and other summary statistics.
  Since this involves visiting every value in each column, it can be
  relatively expensive. Consequently, some systems use sampling
  techniques to get an estimation of the distribution without the
  expense of an exhaustive scan.

Selectivity estimates for joins of base tables can be made by
``joining'' the histograms on the join columns. To move beyond
single-column histograms, more sophisticated schemes to incorporate
issues like dependencies among columns have recently been proposed
{[}16, 69{]}. These innovations have begun to show up in commercial
products, but considerable progress remains to be made. One reason for
the slow adoption of these schemes was a longstanding flaw in many
industry benchmarks: the data generators in benchmarks like TPC-D and
TPC-H generated statistically independent values in columns, and hence
did not encourage the adoption of technology to handle ``real'' data
distributions. This benchmark flaw has been addressed in the TPC-DS
benchmark {[}70{]}. Despite slow adoption rates, the benefits of
improved selectivity estimation are widely recognized. Ioannidis and
Christodoulakis noted that errors in selectivity early in optimization
propagate multiplicatively up the plan tree and result in terrible
subsequent estimations {[}45{]}.

\item
  \emph{Search Algorithms}: Some commercial systems, notably those of
  Microsoft and Tandem, discard Selinger's dynamic programming
  optimization approach in favor of a goal-directed ``top-down'' search
  scheme based on the techniques used in Cascades {[}25{]}. Top-down
  search can in some instances lower the number of plans considered by
  an optimizer {[}82{]}, but can also have the negative effect of
  increasing optimizer memory consumption. If practical success is an
  indication of quality, then the choice between top-down search and
  dynamic programming is irrelevant. Each has been shown to work well in
  state-of-the-art optimizers, and both still have runtimes and memory
  requirements that are, unfortunately, exponential in the number of
  tables in a query.

Some systems fall back on heuristic search schemes for queries with
``too many'' tables. Although the research literature of randomized
query optimization heuristics is interesting {[}5, 18, 44, 84{]}, the
heuristics used in commercial systems tend to be proprietary, and
apparently do not resemble the randomized query optimization literature.
An educational exercise is to examine the query ``optimizer'' of the
open-source MySQL engine, which at last check was entirely heuristic and
relied mostly on exploiting indexes and key/foreign-key constraints.
This is reminiscent of early (and infamous) versions of Oracle. In some
systems, a query with too many tables in the FROM clause can only be
executed if the user explicitly directs the optimizer how to choose a
plan (via so-called optimizer ``hints'' embedded in the SQL).

\item
  \emph{Parallelism}: Every major commercial DBMS today has some support
  for parallel processing. Most also support ``intra-query''
  parallelism: the ability to speed up a single query via the use of
  multiple processors. The query optimizer needs to get involved in
  determining how to schedule operators --- and parallelized operators
  --- across multiple CPUs, and (in the shared-nothing or shared-disk
  cases) across multiple separate computers. Hong and Stonebraker
  {[}42{]} chose to avoid the parallel optimization complexity problem
  and use two phases: first a traditional single-system optimizer is
  invoked to pick the best single-system plan, and then this plan is
  scheduled across multiple processors or machines. Research has been
  published on this second optimization phase {[}19, 21{]} although it
  is not clear to what extent these results have influenced current
  practice.

Some commercial systems implement the two-phase approach described
above. Others attempt to model the cluster network topology and data
distribution across the cluster to produce an optimal plan in a single
phase. While the single pass approach can be shown to produce better
plans under some circumstances, it's not clear whether the additional
query plan quality possible using a single phase approach justifies the
additional optimizer complexity. Consequently, many current
implementations still favor the two-phase approach. Currently this area
seems to be more like art than science. The Oracle OPS (now called RAC)
shared-disk cluster uses a two phase optimizer. IBM DB2 Parallel Edition
(now called DB2 Database Partitioning Feature) was first implemented
using a two-phase optimizer but has since been evolving toward a
single-phase implementation.

\item
  \emph{Auto-Tuning}: A variety of ongoing industrial research efforts
  attempt to improve the ability of a DBMS to make tuning decisions
  automatically. Some of these techniques are based on collecting a
  query workload, and then using the optimizer to find the plan costs
  via various ``what-if'' analyses. What if, for example, other indexes
  had existed or the data had been laid out differently? An optimizer
  needs to be adjusted somewhat to support this activity efficiently, as
  described by Chaudhuri and Narasayya {[}12{]}. The Learning Optimizer
  (LEO) work of Markl et al. {[}57{]} is also in this vein.
\end{itemize}

\hypertarget{a-note-on-query-compilation-and-recompilation}{%
\subsection{A Note on Query Compilation and
Recompilation}\label{a-note-on-query-compilation-and-recompilation}}

SQL supports the ability to ``prepare'' a query: to pass it through the
parser, rewriter and, optimizer, store the resulting query execution
plan, and use it in subsequent ``execute'' statements. This is even
possible for dynamic queries (e.g., from web forms) that have program
variables in the place of query constants. The only wrinkle is that
during selectivity estimation, the variables that are provided by the
forms are assumed by the optimizer to take on ``typical'' values. When
non-representative ``typical'' values are chosen, extremely poor query
execution plans can result. Query preparation is especially useful for
form-driven, canned queries over fairly predictable data: the query is
prepared when the application is written, and when the application goes
live, users do not experience the overhead of parsing, rewriting, and
optimizing.

Although preparing a query when an application is written can improve
performance, this is a very restrictive application model. Many
application programmers, as well as toolkits like Ruby on Rails, build
SQL statements dynamically during program execution, so pre-compiling is
not an option. Because this is so common, DBMSs store these dynamic
query execution plans in the query plan cache. If the same (or very
similar) statement is subsequently submitted, the cached version is
used. This technique approximates the performance of pre-compiled static
SQL without the application model restrictions and is heavily used.

As a database changes over time, it often becomes necessary to
re-optimize prepared plans. At a minimum, when an index is dropped, any
plan that used that index must be removed from the stored plan cache, so
that a new plan will be chosen upon the next invocation.

Other decisions about re-optimizing plans are more subtle, and expose
philosophical distinctions among the vendors. Some vendors (e.g., IBM)
work very hard to provide \emph{predictable performance} across
invocations at the expense of optimal performance per invocation. As a
result, they will not re-optimize a plan unless it will no longer
execute, as in the case of dropped indexes. Other vendors (e.g.,
Microsoft) work very hard to make their systems \emph{self-tuning}, and
will re-optimize plans
more aggressively. For example, if the cardinality of a table changes
significantly, recompilation will be triggered in SQL Server since this
change may influence the optimal use of indexes and join orders. A
self-tuning system is arguably less predictable, but more efficient in a
dynamic environment.

This philosophical distinction arises from differences in the historical
customer base for these products. IBM traditionally focused on high-end
customers with skilled DBAs and application programmers. In these kinds
of high-budget IT shops, predictable performance from the database is of
paramount importance. After spending months tuning the database design
and settings, the DBA does not want the optimizer to change it
unpredictably. By contrast, Microsoft strategically entered the database
market at the low end. As a result, their customers tend to have lower
IT budgets and expertise, and want the DBMS to ``tune itself'' as much
as possible.

Over time these companies' business strategies and customer bases have
converged so that they compete directly, and their approaches are
evolving together. Microsoft has high-scale enterprise customers that
want complete control and query plan stability. And IBM has some
customers without DBA resources needing full auto-administration.

\hypertarget{query-executor}{%
\section{Query Executor}\label{query-executor}}

The query executor operates on a fully specified query plan. This is
typically a directed dataflow graph that connects operators that
encapsulate base table access and various query execution algorithms. In
some systems, this dataflow graph is already compiled into low-level
op-codes by the optimizer. In this case, the query executor is basically
a runtime interpreter. In other systems, the query executor receives a
representation of the dataflow graph and recursively invokes procedures
for the operators based on the graph layout. We focus on this latter
case, as the op-code approach essentially compiles the logic we describe
here into a program.

Most modern query executors employ the \emph{iterator} model that was
used in the earliest relational systems. Iterators are most simply
described in an object-oriented fashion. \autoref{fig-4-2} shows a simplified
definition for an iterator. Each iterator specifies its inputs that
define
the edges in the dataflow graph. All operators in a query plan --- the
nodes in the dataflow graph --- are implemented as subclasses of the
iterator class. The set of subclasses in a typical system might include
filescan, indexscan, sort, nested-loops join, merge-join, hash-join,
duplicate-elimination, and grouped-aggregation. An important feature of
the iterator model is that any subclass of iterator can be used as input
to any other. Hence each iterator's logic is independent of its children
and parents in the graph, and special-case code for particular
combinations of iterators is not needed.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\begin{BVerbatim}
class iterator {
  iterator &inputs[];
  void init();
  tuple get_next();
  void close();
}
\end{BVerbatim}

\caption{Iterator superclass pseudocode.\label{fig-4-2}}
\end{figure}

Graefe provides more details on iterators in his query execution survey
{[}24{]}. The interested reader is also encouraged to examine the
open-source PostgreSQL code base. PostgreSQL utilizes moderately
sophisticated implementations of the iterators for most standard query
execution algorithms.

\hypertarget{iterator-discussion}{%
\subsection{Iterator Discussion}\label{iterator-discussion}}

An important property of iterators is that they \emph{couple dataflow
with} \emph{control flow}. The \texttt{get\_next()} call is a standard procedure
call that returns a tuple reference to the caller via the call stack.
Hence a tuple is returned to a parent in the graph exactly when control
is returned. This implies that only a single DBMS thread is needed to
execute an entire query graph, and queues or rate-matching between
iterators are not needed. This makes relational query executors clean to
implement and easy to debug, and is a contrast with dataflow
architectures in other environments. Networks, for example, rely on
various protocols for queuing and feedback between concurrent producers
and consumers.

The single-threaded iterator architecture is also quite efficient for
single-system (non-cluster) query execution. In most database
applications, the performance metric of merit is \emph{time to query
completion}, but other optimization goals are possible. For example,
maximizing DBMS throughput is another reasonable goal. Another that is
popular with interactive applications is \emph{time to first row}. In a
single-processor environment, time to completion for a given query plan
is achieved when resources are fully utilized. In an iterator model,
since one of the iterators is always active, resource utilization is
maximized.\footnote{This assumes that iterators never block waiting for I/O requests. In
the cases where prefetching is ineffective, inefficiencies in the
iterator model can occur due to blocking on I/O. This is typically not
a problem in single-system databases, but it arises frequently when
executing queries over remote tables or in multi-system clusters
{[}23, 56{]}.}

As we mentioned previously, most modern DBMSs support parallel query
execution. Fortunately, this support can be provided with essentially no
changes to the iterator model or query execution architecture.
Parallelism and network communications can be encapsulated within
special \emph{exchange} iterators, as described by Graefe {[}23{]};
these also implement network-style ``pushing'' of data in a manner that
is invisible to the DBMS iterators, which retain a ``pull''-style get
next() API. Some systems make the push logic explicit in their query
execution model as well.

\hypertarget{wheres-the-data}{%
\subsection{Where's the Data?}\label{wheres-the-data}}

Our discussion of iterators has conveniently sidestepped any questions
of memory allocation for in-flight data. We neither specified how tuples
were stored in memory, nor how they were passed between iterators. In
practice, each iterator is pre-allocated a fixed number of \emph{tuple
descriptors}, one for each of its inputs, and one for its output. A
tuple descriptor is typically an array of column references, where each
column reference is composed of a reference to a tuple somewhere else in
memory, and a column offset in that tuple. The basic iterator superclass
logic never allocates memory dynamically. This raises the question of
where the actual tuples being referenced are stored in memory.

There are two possible answers to this question. The first is that
tuples reside in pages in the buffer pool. We call these
\emph{BP-tuples}. If an iterator constructs a tuple descriptor that
references a BP-tuple, it must
increment the \emph{pin count} of the tuple's page --- a count of the
number of active references to tuples on that page. It decrements the
pin count when the tuple descriptor is cleared. The second possibility
is that an iterator implementation may allocate space for a tuple on the
memory heap. We call this an \emph{M-tuple}. An iterator may construct
an M-tuple by copying columns from the buffer pool (the copy bracketed
by a pin increment/decrement pair), and/or by evaluating expressions
(e.g., arithmetic expressions like ``EMP.sal * 0.1'') in the
query specification.

One general approach is to always copy data out of the buffer pool
immediately into M-tuples. This design uses M-tuples as the only
in-flight tuple structure and simplifies the executor code. The design
also circumvents bugs that can result from having buffer-pool pin and
unpin calls separated by long periods of execution (and many lines of
code). One common bug of this sort is to forget to unpin the page
altogether (a ``buffer leak''). Unfortunately, as noted in Section 4.2,
exclusive use of M-tuples can be a major performance problem, since
memory copies are often a serious bottleneck in high-performance
systems.

On the other hand, constructing an M-tuple makes sense in some cases. As
long as a BP-tuple is directly referenced by an iterator, the page on
which the BP-tuple resides must remain pinned in the buffer pool. This
consumes a page worth of buffer pool memory, and ties the hands of the
buffer replacement policy. Copying a tuple out of the buffer pool can be
beneficial if the tuple will continue to be referenced for a long period
of time.

The upshot of this discussion is that the most efficient approach is to
support tuple descriptors that can reference both BP-tuples and
M-tuples.

\hypertarget{data-modification-statements}{%
\subsection{Data Modification
Statements}\label{data-modification-statements}}

Up to this point we have only discussed queries, that is, read-only SQL
statements. Another class of DML statements exist that modify data:
INSERT, DELETE, and UPDATE statements. Execution plans for these
statements typically look like simple straight-line query plans, with a
single access method as the source, and a data modification operator at
the end of the pipeline.

In some cases, however, these plans both query and modify the same data.
This mix of reading and writing the same table (possibly multiple times)
requires some care. A simple example is the notorious ``Halloween
problem,''\footnote{Despite the spooky similarity in names, the Halloween problem has
nothing to do with the phantom problem of Section 4.2.1} so called because it was discovered on
October 31st by the System R group. The Halloween problem arises from a
particular execution strategy for statements like ``give everyone whose
salary is under \$20K a 10\% raise.'' A na\"ive plan for this query
pipelines an index scan iterator over the Emp.salary field into an
update iterator (the left-hand side of \autoref{fig-4-3}). The pipelining
provides good I/O
locality, because it modifies tuples just after they are fetched from
the B+-tree. This pipelining, however, can also result in the index scan
``rediscovering'' a previously modified tuple that moved rightward in
the tree after modification, leading to multiple raises for each
employee. In our example, all low-paid employees will receive repeated
raises until they earn more than \$20K. This is not the intention of the
statement.

\begin{figure}
\centering
%\includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{./media/fig-4-3.png}
\tikzset{EMP/.style={ellipse, minimum width=12em, minimum height=12ex, align=center, draw}}
\centering
\begin{tikzpicture}[scale=\textwidth/14cm,samples=200]

  \path (0,0) node[EMP] (l1) {IndexScan\\EMP}
        (0,3) node[EMP] (l2) {Update\\EMP};

  \draw[-Latex] (l1) -- (l2);

  \path (9,0)  node[EMP] (r1) {IndexScan\\EMP}
        (9,3)  node[EMP] (r2) {Marterialize\\RID}
        (9,6)  node[EMP] (r3) {HeapScan}
        (9,9)  node[EMP] (r4) {Fetch-by-RID\\EMP}
        (9,12) node[EMP] (r5) {Update\\EMP};

  \path[-Latex] (r1) edge (r2)
                (r2) edge (r3)
                (r3) edge (r4)
                (r4) edge (r5);

  \node[align=left,font=\ttfamily] at (0,9) {%
\verb+UPDATE EMP+\\
\verb+   SET salary=salary*1.1+\\
\verb+ WHERE salary < 20000+};

\end{tikzpicture}

\caption{Two query plans for updating a table via an IndexScan. The plan
on the left is susceptible to the Halloween problem. The plan on the
right is safe, since it identifies all tuples to be updated before
actually performing any updates.\label{fig-4-3}}
\end{figure}

SQL semantics forbid this behavior: a single SQL statement is not
allowed to ``see'' its own updates. Some care is needed to ensure that
this visibility rule is observed. A simple, safe implementation has the
query optimizer choose plans that avoid indexes on the updated column.
This can be quite inefficient in some cases. Another technique is to use
a batch read-then-write scheme. This interposes Record-ID
materialization and fetching operators between the index scan and the
data modification operators in the dataflow (right-hand side of \autoref{fig-4-3}). The materialization operator receives the IDs of all tuples to be
modified and stores them in temporary file. It then scans the temporary
file and fetches each physical tuple ID by RID and feeds the resulting
tuple to the data modification operator. If the optimizer chooses an
index, in most cases this implies that only a few tuples are being
changed. Hence the apparent inefficiency of this technique may be
acceptable, since the temporary table is likely to remain entirely in
the buffer pool. Pipelined update schemes are also possible, but require
(somewhat exotic) multi-version support from the storage engine
{[}74{]}.

\hypertarget{access-methods}{%
\section{Access Methods}\label{access-methods}}

Access methods are the routines that manage access to the various
disk-based data structures that the system supports. These typically
included unordered files (``heaps''), and various kinds of indexes. All
major commercial systems implement heaps and B+-tree indexes. Both
Oracle and PostgreSQL support hash indexes for equality lookups. Some
systems are beginning to introduce rudimentary support for
multi-dimensional indexes such as R-trees {[}32{]}. PostgreSQL supports
an extensible index called the Generalized Search Tree (GiST) {[}39{]},
and currently uses it to implement R-trees for multi-dimensional data,
and RD-trees for text data {[}40{]}. IBM UDB Version 8 introduced
Multi-Dimensional Clustered (MDC) Indexes for accessing data via ranges
on multiple dimensions {[}66{]}. Systems that target read-mostly data
warehousing workloads often include specialized bitmap variants of
indexes as well {[}65{]}, as we describe in Section 4.6.

The basic API that an access method provides is an iterator API. The
\texttt{init()} routine is expanded to accept a ``search argument'' (or in the
terminology of System R, a SARG) of the form column operator constant. A
\texttt{NULL} SARG is treated as a request to scan all tuples in the table. The
\texttt{get\_next()} call at the access method layer returns \texttt{NULL} when no more
tuples satisfy the search argument.

There are two reasons to pass SARGs into the access method layer. The
first reason should be clear: index access methods like B+-trees require
SARGs in order to function efficiently. The second reason is a more
subtle performance issue, but one that applies to heap scans as well as
index scans. Assume that the SARG is checked by the routine that calls
the access method layer. Then each time the access method returns from
\texttt{get\_next()}, it must either (a) return a handle to a tuple residing in a
frame in the buffer pool, and pin the page in that frame to avoid
replacement or (b) make a copy of the tuple. If the caller finds that
the SARG is not satisfied, it is responsible for either (a) decrementing
the pin count on the page, or (b) deleting the copied tuple. It must
then reinvoke \texttt{get\_next()} to try the next tuple on the page. This logic
consumes a significant number of CPU cycles in function call/return
pairs, and will either pin pages in the buffer pool unnecessarily
(generating unnecessary contention for buffer frames) or create and
destroy copies of tuples unnecessarily --- a significant CPU overhead
when streaming through millions of tuples. Note that a typical heap scan
will access all of the tuples on a given page, resulting in multiple
iterations of this interaction per page. By contrast, if all this logic
is done in the access method layer, the repeated pairs of call/return
and either pin/unpin or copy/delete can be avoided by testing the SARGs
a page at a time, and only returning from a \texttt{get\_next()} call for a tuple
that satisfies the SARG. SARGS keep a nice clean architectural boundary
between the storage engine and the relational engine while obtaining
excellent performance. Consequently, many systems support very rich SARG
support and use them broadly. Thematically, this is an instance of the
standard DBMS wisdom of amortizing work across multiple items in a
collection, but in this case it is being applied for CPU performance,
rather than disk performance.

All DBMSs need some way to ``point'' to rows in a base table, so that
index entries can reference the rows appropriately. In many DBMSs, this
is implemented by using direct row IDs (RIDs) that are the physical disk
addresses of the rows in the base tables. This has the advantage of
being fast, but has the downside of making base table row movement very
expensive since all secondary indexes that point to this row require
updating. Both finding and updating these rows can be costly. Rows need
to move when an update changes the row size and space is unavailable on
the current page for the freshly updated row. And many rows need to move
when a B+-tree is split. DB2 uses a forwarding pointer to avoid the
first problem. This requires a second I/O to find a moved page, but
avoids having to update the secondary index. DB2 avoids the second
problem by simply not supporting B+-trees as primary storage for base
table tuples. Microsoft SQL Server and Oracle support B+-trees as
primary storage and must be able to deal with row movement efficiently.
The approach taken is to avoid using a physical row address in the
secondary indexes and instead use the row primary key (with some
additional system provided bits to force uniqueness if the table does
not have a unique key) rather than the physical RID. This sacrifices
some performance when using a secondary index to access a base table
row, but avoids the problems that row movement causes. Oracle avoids the
performance penalty of this approach in some cases by keeping a physical
pointer with the primary key. If the row has not moved, it will be found
quickly using the physical pointer. But, if it has moved, the slower
primary key technique will be used.

Oracle avoids moving rows in heap files by allowing rows to span pages.
So, when a row is updated to a longer value that no longer fits on the
original page, rather than being forced to move the row, they store what
fits in the original page and the remainder can span to the next.

In contrast to all other iterators, access methods have deep
interactions with the concurrency and recovery logic surrounding
transactions, as described in Section 4.

\hypertarget{data-warehouses}{%
\section{Data Warehouses}\label{data-warehouses}}

Data Warehouses --- large historical databases for decision-support that
are loaded with new data on a periodic basis --- have evolved to require
specialized query processing support, and in the next section we survey
some of the key features that they tend to require. This topic is
relevant for two main reasons:

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\item
  Data warehouses are a very important application of DBMS technology.
  Some claim that warehouses account for $1/3$ of all DBMS activity {[}26,
  63{]}.
\item
  The conventional query optimization and execution engines discussed so
  far in this section do not work well on data warehouses. Hence,
  extensions or modifications are required to achieve good performance.
\end{enumerate}

Relational DBMSs were first architected in the 1970's and 1980's to
address the needs of business data processing applications, since that
was the dominant requirement at the time. In the early 1990's the market
for data warehouses and ``business analytics'' appeared, and has grown
dramatically since that time.

By the 1990's on-line transaction processing (OLTP) had replaced batch
business data processing as the dominant paradigm for database usage.
Moreover, most OLTP systems had banks of computer operators submitting
transactions, either from phone conversations with the end customer or
by performing data entry from paper. Automated teller machines had
become widespread, allowing customers to do certain interactions
directly without operator intervention. Response time for such
transactions was crucial to productivity. Such response time
requirements have only become more urgent and varied today as the web is
fast replacing operators with self-service by the end customer.

About the same time, enterprises in the retail space had the idea to
capture all historical sales transactions, and to store them typically
for one or two years. Such historical sales data can be used by buyers
to figure out ``what's hot and what's not.'' Such information can be
leveraged to affect purchasing patterns. Similarly, such data can be
used to decide what items to put on promotion, which ones to discount,
and which ones to send back to the manufacturer. The common wisdom of
the time was that a historical data warehouse in the retail space paid
for itself through better stock management, shelf and store layout in a
matter of months.

It was clear at the time that a data warehouse should be deployed on
separate hardware from an OLTP system. Using that methodology, the
lengthy (and often unpredictable) business intelligence queries would
not spoil OLTP response time. Also, the nature of data is very
different; warehouses deal with history, OLTP deals with ``now.''
Finally, it was found that the schema desired for historical data often
did not match the schema desired for current data, and a data
transformation was required to convert from one to the other.

For these reasons workflow systems were constructed that would
``scrape'' data from operational OLTP systems and load it into a data
warehouse. Such systems were branded ``extract, transform, and load''
(ETL) systems. Popular ETL products include Data Stage from IBM and
PowerCenter from Informatica. In the last decade ETL vendors have
extended their products with data cleansing tools, de-duplication tools,
and other quality-oriented offerings.

There are several issues that must be dealt with in the data warehouse
environment, as we discuss below.

\hypertarget{bitmap-indexes}{%
\subsection{Bitmap Indexes}\label{bitmap-indexes}}

B+-trees are optimized for fast insertion, deletion, and update of
records. In contrast, a data warehouse performs an initial load and then
the data is static for months or years. Moreover, data warehouses often
have columns with a small number of values. Consider, for example,
storing the sex of a customer. There are only two values, and this can
be represented by one bit per record in a bitmap. In contrast, a B+-tree
will require (value, record-pointer) pairs for each record and will
typically consume 40 bits per record.

Bitmaps are also advantageous for conjunctive filters, such as\\

\centerline{\texttt{Customer.sex = ``F'' and Customer.state = ``California''}}

In this case, the result set can be determined by intersecting bitmaps.
There are a host of more sophisticated bitmap arithmetic tricks that can
be played to improve performance of common analytics queries. For a
discussion of bitmap processing, the interested reader should consult
{[}65{]}.

In current products, bitmap indexes complement the B+-trees in Oracle
for indexing stored data, while DB2 offers a more limited version.
Sybase IQ makes extensive use of bitmap indexes. Of course, the
disadvantage of bitmaps is that they are expensive to update, so their
utility is restricted to warehouse environments.

\hypertarget{fast-load}{%
\subsection{Fast Load}\label{fast-load}}

Often, data warehouses are loaded in the middle of the night with the
days' transactional data. This was an obvious strategy for retail
establishments that are open only during the day. A second reason for
bulk nightly loads is to avoid having updates appear during user
interaction. Consider the case of a business analyst who wishes to
formulate some sort of \emph{ad-hoc} query, perhaps to investigate the
impact of hurricanes on customer buying patterns. The result of this
query might suggest a follow-on query, such as investigating buying
patterns during large storms. The result of these two queries should be
compatible, i.e., the answers should be computed on the same data set.
This can be problematic for queries that include recent history, if data
is being concurrently loaded.

As such, it is crucial that data warehouses be bulk-loadable very
quickly. Although one could program warehouse loads with a sequence of
SQL insert statements, this tactic is never used in practice. Instead a
bulk loader is utilized that will stream large numbers of records into
storage without the overhead of the SQL layer, and taking advantage of
special bulk-load methods for access methods like B+-trees. In round
numbers, a bulk loader is an order of magnitude faster than SQL inserts,
and all major vendors offer a high performance bulk loader.

As the world moves to e-commerce and 24 hour-per-day sales, this bulk
load tactic makes less sense. But the move to ``real time'' warehouses
has a couple of problems. First, inserts, whether from the bulk loader
or from transactions, must set write locks as discussed in Section 6.3.
These collide with the read locks acquired by queries, and can cause the
warehouse to ``freeze up.'' Second, providing compatible answers across
query sets as described above is problematic.

Both issues can be circumvented by avoiding update-in-place, and
providing historical queries. If one keeps before and after values of
updates, suitably timestamped, then one can provide queries as of a time
in the recent past. Running a collection of queries as of the same
historical time will provide compatible answers. Moreover, the same
historical queries can be run without setting read locks.

As discussed in Section 5.2.1, multi-version (MVCC) isolation levels
like SNAPSHOT ISOLATION are provided by some vendors, notably Oracle. As
real time warehouses become more popular, the other vendors will
presumably follow suit.

\hypertarget{materialized-views}{%
\subsection{Materialized Views}\label{materialized-views}}

Data warehouses are typically gigantic, and queries that join multiple
large tables have a tendency to run ``forever.'' To speed up performance
on popular queries, most vendors offer materialized views. Unlike the
purely logical views discussed earlier in this section, materialized
views take are actual tables that can be queried, but which correspond
to a logical view expression over the true ``base'' data tables. A query
to a materialized view will avoid having to perform the joins in the
view expression at run time. Instead, the materialized view must be kept
up to date as updates are performed.

There are three aspects to Materialized View use: (a) selecting the
views to materialize, (b) maintaining the freshness of the views, and
(c) considering the use of materialized views in \emph{ad-hoc} queries.
Topic (a) is an advanced aspect of the automatic database tuning we
mentioned in Section 4.3. Topic (c) is implemented to varying extents in
the various products; the problem is theoretically challenging even for
simple single-block queries {[}51{]}, and moreso for generic SQL with
aggregation and subqueries. For (b), most vendors offer multiple refresh
techniques, ranging from performing a materialized view update on each
update to the tables from which the materialized view is derived, to
periodically discarding and then recreating the materialized view. Such
tactics offer a trade-off between run-time overhead and data consistency
of the materialized view.

\hypertarget{olap-and-ad-hoc-query-support}{%
\subsection{\texorpdfstring{OLAP and \emph{Ad-hoc} Query
Support}{OLAP and Ad-hoc Query Support}}\label{olap-and-ad-hoc-query-support}}

Some warehouse workloads have predictable queries. For example, at the
end of every month, a summary report might be run to provide total sales
by department for each sales region in a retail chain. Interspersed with
this workload are \emph{ad-hoc queries}, formulated on the fly by
business analysts.

Obviously, predictable queries can be supported by appropriately
constructed materialized views. More generally, since most business
analytics queries ask for aggregates, one can compute a materialized
view which is the aggregate sales by department for each store. Then, if
the above region query is specified, it can be satisfied by ``rolling
up'' individual stores in each region.

Such aggregates are often called \emph{data cubes}, and are an
interesting class of materialized views. In the early 1990's products
such as Essbase provided customized tools for storing data in priority
cube format while providing cube-based user interfaces to navigate the
data, and this capability came to be known as on-line analytical
processing (OLAP). Over time, data cube support has been added to
full-function relational database systems, and is often termed
Relational OLAP (ROLAP). Many DBMSs that provide ROLAP have evolved to
internally implement some of the earlier OLAP-style storage schemes in
special cases, and as a result are sometimes referred to as HOLAP
(Hybrid OLAP) schemes.

Clearly, data cubes provide high performance for a predictable, limited
class of queries. However, they are generally not helpful for
supporting \emph{ad-hoc} queries.

\hypertarget{optimization-of-snowflake-schema-queries}{%
\subsection{Optimization of Snowflake Schema
Queries}\label{optimization-of-snowflake-schema-queries}}

Many data warehouses follow a particular method for schema design.
Specifically, they store a collection of \emph{facts}, which, in a
retail environment, are typically simple records like ``customer X
bought product Y from store Z at time T.'' A central fact table records
information about each fact, such as the purchase price, discount, sales
tax information, etc. Also in the fact table are foreign keys for each
of a set of \emph{dimensions}. Dimensions can include customers,
products, stores, time, etc. A schema of this form is usually called a
\emph{star schema,} because it has a central fact table surrounded by
dimensions, each with a 1-N primary-key-foreign-key relationship to the
fact table. Drawn in an entity-relationship diagram, such a schema is
star-shaped.

Many dimensions are naturally hierarchical. For example, if stores can
be aggregated into regions, then the Stores ``dimension table'' has an
added foreign key to a Region dimension table. Similar hierarchies are
typical for attributes involving time (months/days/years), management
hierarchies, and so on. In these cases, a multi-level star, or
\emph{snowflake} schema results.

Essentially all data warehouse queries entail filtering one or more
dimensions in a snowflake schema on some attributes in these tables,
then joining the result to the central fact table, grouping by some
attributes in the fact table or a dimension table, and then computing an
SQL aggregate.

Over time, vendors have special-cased this class of query in their
optimizers, because it is so popular, and it is crucial to choose a good
plan for such long running commands.

\hypertarget{data-warehousing-conclusions}{%
\subsection{Data Warehousing:
Conclusions}\label{data-warehousing-conclusions}}

As can be seen, data warehouses require quite different capabilities
from OLTP environments. In addition to B+-trees, one needs bitmap
indexes. Instead of a general purpose optimizer, one needs to focus
special attention on aggregate queries over snowflake schemas. Instead
of normal views, one requires materialized views. Instead of fast
transactional updates, one needs fast bulk load, etc. A longer overview
of data warehousing practices can be found in {[}11{]}.

The major relational vendors began with OLTP-oriented architectures, and
have added warehouse-oriented features over time. In addition, there are
a variety of smaller vendors offering DBMS solutions in this space.
These include Teradata and Netezza, who offer shared-nothing proprietary
hardware on which their DBMSs run. Also, selling to this space are
Greenplum (a parallelization of PostgreSQL), DATAllegro, and
EnterpriseDB, all of whom are run on more conventional hardware.

Finally, there are some (including one of the authors) who claim that
\emph{column stores} have a huge advantage in the data warehouse space
versus traditional storage engines in which the unit of storage is a
table row. Storing each column separately is especially efficient when
tables are ``wide'' (high arity), and accesses tend to be on only a few
columns. Column storage also enables simple and effective disk
compression, since all data in a column is from the same type. The
challenge with column stores is that the position of rows in the table
needs to remain consistent across all stored columns, or extra
mechanisms are needed to join up columns. This is a big problem for
OLTP, but not a major issue for append-mostly databases like warehouses
or system-log repositories. Vendors offering column stores include
Sybase, Vertica, Sand, Vhayu, and KX. More details on this architecture
discussion can be found in {[}36, 89, 90{]}.

\hypertarget{database-extensibility}{%
\section{Database Extensibility}\label{database-extensibility}}

Relational databases have traditionally been viewed as being limited in
the kinds of data they store, focused mostly on the ``facts and
figures'' used in corporate and administrative record-keeping. Today,
however, they host a wide range of data types expressed in a variety of
popular programming languages. This is achieved by making the core
relational DBMS extensible in a variety of ways. In this section, we
briefly survey the kinds of extensions that are in wide use,
highlighting some of the architectural issues that arise in delivering
this extensibility. These features appear in most of the commercial
DBMSs today to varying degrees, and in the open-source PostgreSQL DBMS
as well.

\hypertarget{abstract-data-types}{%
\subsection{Abstract Data Types}\label{abstract-data-types}}

In principle, the relational model is agnostic to the choice of scalar
data types that can be placed on schema columns. But the initial
relational database systems supported only a static set of alphanumeric
column types, and this limitation came to be associated with the
relational model \emph{per se}. A relational DBMS can be made extensible
to new abstract data types at runtime, as was illustrated in the early
Ingres-ADT system, and more aggressively in the follow-on Postgres
system {[}88{]}.
  To achieve this, the DBMS type system --- and hence the parser --- has
  to be driven from the system catalog, which maintains the list of
  types known to the system, and pointers to the ``methods'' (code) used
  to manipulate the types. In this approach, the DBMS does not interpret
  types, it merely invokes their methods appropriately in expression
  evaluation; hence the name ``abstract data types''. As a typical
  example, one could register a type for 2-dimensional spatial
  ``rectangles,'' and methods for operations like rectangle intersection
  or union. This also means that the system must provide a runtime
  engine for user-defined code, and safely execute that code without any
  risk of crashing the database server or corrupting data. All of
  today's major DBMSs allow users to define functions in an imperative
  ``stored procedure'' sublanguage of modern SQL. With the exception of
  MySQL, most support at least a few other languages, typically C and
  Java. On the Windows platform, Microsoft SQL Server and IBM DB2
  support code compiled to the Microsoft. Net Common Language Runtime,
  which can be written in a wide variety of languages, most commonly
  Visual Basic, C++, and C\#. PostgreSQL ships with support for C, Perl,
  Python and Tcl, and allows support for new languages to be added to
  the system at runtime --- there are popular third-party plugins for
  Ruby and the open-source R statistical package.

To make abstract data types run efficiently in the DBMS, the query
optimizer has to account for ``expensive'' user-defined code in
selection and join predicates, and in some cases postpone selections
until after joins {[}13, 37{]}. To make ADTs even more efficient, it is
useful to be able to define indexes on them. At minimum, B+-trees need
to be extended to index expressions over ADTs rather than just columns
(sometimes termed ``functional indexes''), and the optimizer has to be
extended to choose them when applicable. For predicates other than
linear orders (\textless{}, \textgreater{}, =), B+-trees are
insufficient, and the system needs to support an extensible indexing
scheme; two approaches in the literature are the original Postgres
extensible access method interface {[}88{]}, and the GiST {[}39{]}.

\hypertarget{structured-types-and-xml}{%
\subsection{Structured Types and
XML}\label{structured-types-and-xml}}

ADTs are designed to be fully compatible with the relational model ---
they do not in any way change the basic relational algebra, they only
change the expressions over attribute values. Over the years, however,
there have been many proposals for more aggressive changes to databases
to support non-relational \emph{structured} types: i.e., nested
collection types like arrays, sets, trees, and nested tuples and/or
relations. Perhaps the most relevant of these proposals today is the
support for XML via languages like XPath and XQuery.\footnote{XML is sometimes referred to as ``semi-structured'' data, because it
places no restrictions on the structure of documents. However, unlike
free-text, it \emph{encourages} structure, including non-relational
complexities like ordering and nested collections. The complications
in storing and querying XML in databases tend to arise from handling
the structure of an XML document, rather than from issues in dealing
with unstructured text within the document. Indeed, many of the
techniques used for query processing over XML have their roots in
research on the richly structured ODMG object database model, and its
OQL query language.}
There are roughly three approaches to handling structured types like
XML. The first is to build a custom database system that operates on
data with structured types; historically these attempts have been
overshadowed by approaches that accommodate the structured types within
a traditional relational DBMS, and this trend was followed in the case
of XML as well. The second approach is to treat the complex type as an
ADT. For example, one can define a relational table with a column of
type XML that stores an XML document per row. This means that
expressions to search the XML --- e.g., XPath tree-matching patterns ---
are executed in a manner that is opaque to the query optimizer. A third
approach is for the DBMS to ``normalize'' the nested structure into a
set of relations upon insertion, with foreign keys connecting
sub-objects to their parents. This technique, sometimes called
``shredding'' the XML, exposes all the structure of the data to the DBMS
within a relational framework, but adds storage overhead, and requires
joins to ``reconnect'' the data upon querying. Most DBMS vendors today
offer both ADT and shredded options for storage, and allow the database
designer to choose between them. In the case of XML, it is also common
in the shredded approach to offer the option of removing the ordering
information between XML elements nested at the same level, which
can improve query performance by allowing join reordering and other
relational optimizations.

A related issue is more modest extensions to the relational model to
handle nested tables and tuples, as well as arrays. These are widely
used in Oracle installations, for example. The design trade-offs are
similar in many ways to those of handling XML.

\hypertarget{full-text-search}{%
\subsection{Full-Text Search}\label{full-text-search}}

Traditionally, relational databases were notoriously poor at handling
rich textual data and the keyword search that usually goes with it. In
principle, modeling free-text in a database is a simple matter of
storing the documents, defining an ``inverted file'' relation with
tuples of the form \texttt{(word, documentID, position)}, and building a B+-tree
index over the word column. This is roughly what happens in any text
search engine, modulo some linguistic canonicalization of words, and
some additional per-tuple attributes to aid in rank-ordering search
results. But in addition to the model, most text indexing engines
implement a number of performance optimizations specific to this schema,
which are not implemented in a typical DBMS. These include
``denormalizing'' the schema to have each word appear only once with a
list of occurrences per word, i.e., \texttt{(word, list \textless{}documentID,
position\textgreater{})} This allows for aggressive delta-compression of
the list (typically called a ``postings list''), which is critical given
the characteristically skewed (Zipfian) distribution of words in
documents. Moreover, text databases tend to be used in a data
warehousing style, bypassing any DBMS logic for transactions. The common
belief is that a na\"ive implementation of text search in a DBMS like the
one above runs roughly an order of magnitude slower than the custom text
indexing engines.

However, most DBMSs today either contain a subsystem for text indexing,
or can be bundled with a separate engine to do the job. The text
indexing facility can typically be used both over full-text documents,
and over short textual attributes in tuples. In most cases the full-text
index is updated asynchronously (``crawled'') rather than being
maintained transactionally; PostgreSQL is unusual in offering the option
of a full-text index with transactional updates. In some systems,
the full-text index is stored outside the DBMS, and hence requires
separate tools for backup and restore. A key challenge in handling
full-text search in a relational database is to bridge the semantics of
relational queries (unordered and complete sets of results) with ranked
document search using keywords (ordered and typically incomplete
results) in a way that is useful and flexible. For example, it is
unclear how to order the output of a join query over two relations when
there is a keyword search predicate on each relation. This issue remains
rather \emph{ad hoc} in current practice. Given a semantics for query
output, another challenge is for the relational query optimizer to
reason about selectivity and cost estimation for the text index, as well
as judging the appropriate cost model for a query whose answer set is
ordered and paginated in the user interface, and likely not to be
retrieved completely. By all reports, this last topic is being
aggressively pursued in a number of the popular DBMSs.

\hypertarget{additional-extensibility-issues}{%
\subsection{Additional Extensibility
Issues}\label{additional-extensibility-issues}}

In addition to the three driving usage scenarios for database
extensibility, we bring up two core components within the engine that
are often made extensible for a variety of uses.

There have been a number of proposals for extensible query optimizers,
including the designs that underpin the IBM DB2 optimizer {[}54, 68{]},
and the designs that underpin the Tandem and Microsoft optimizers {[}25{]}.
All these schemes provide rule-driven subsystems that generate or
modify query plans, and allow new optimization rules to be registered
independently. These techniques are helpful in making it easier to
extend the optimizer when new features are added to the query
executor, or when new ideas are developed for specific query rewrites
or plan optimizations. These generic architectures were important in
enabling many of the specific extensible type functionalities
described above.

Another cross-cutting form of extensibility that arose since the early
systems is the ability for the database to ``wrap'' remote data sources
within the schema as if they were native tables, and access them during
query processing. One challenge in this regard is for the optimizer to
handle data sources that do not support scans, but will respond requests
that assign values to variables; this requires generalizing the
optimizer logic that matches index SARGs to query predicates {[}33{]}.
Another challenge is for the executor to deal efficiently with remote
data sources that may be slow or bursty in producing outputs; this
generalizes the design challenge of having the query executor do
asynchronous disk I/O, increasing the access-time variability by an
order of magnitude or more {[}22, 92{]}.

\hypertarget{standard-practice-2}{%
\section{Standard Practice}\label{standard-practice-2}}

The coarse architecture of essentially all relational database query
engines looks similar to that of the System R prototype {[}3{]}. Query
processing research and development over the years has focused on
innovations within that framework, to accelerate more and more classes
of queries and schemas. Major design differences across systems arise in
the optimizer search strategy (top-down vs.~bottom-up), and in the query
executor control-flow model, especially for shared-nothing and
shared-disk parallelism (iterators and the exchange operator
vs.~asynchronous producer/consumer schemes). At a finer-grained level,
there is a good deal of differentiation on the mix of schemes used
within the optimizer, executor, and access methods to achieve good
performance for different workloads including OLTP, decision-support for
warehousing, and OLAP. This ``secret sauce'' within the commercial
products determines how well they perform in specific circumstances, but
to a first approximation all of the commercial systems do quite well
across a broad range of workloads, and can be made to look slow in
specific workloads.

In the open source arena, PostgreSQL has a reasonably sophisticated
query processor with a traditional cost-based optimizer, a broad set of
execution algorithms, and a number of extensibility features not found
in commercial products. MySQL's query processor is far simpler, built
around nested-loop joins over indices. The MySQL query optimizer focuses
on analyzing queries to make sure that common operations are lightweight
and efficient --- particularly key/foreign-key joins, outer-join-to-join
rewrites, and queries that ask for only the first few rows of the result
set. It is instructive to read through the MySQL manual and query
processing code and compare it to the more involved traditional designs,
keeping in mind the high adoption rate of MySQL in practice, and the
tasks at which it seems to excel.

\hypertarget{discussion-and-additional-material-2}{%
\section{Discussion and Additional
Material}\label{discussion-and-additional-material-2}}

Because of the clean modularity of query optimization and execution,
there have been a huge number of algorithms, techniques, and tricks that
have been developed in this environment over the years, and relational
query processing research continues today. Happily, most of the ideas
that have been used in practice (and many that have not) are found in
the research literature. A good starting point for query optimization
research is Chaudhuri's short survey {[}10{]}. For query processing
research, Graefe offers a very comprehensive survey {[}24{]}.

Beyond traditional query processing, there has been a great deal of work
in recent years to incorporate rich statistical methods into the
processing of large data sets. One natural extension is to use sampling
or summary statistics to provide numerical approximations to aggregation
queries {[}20{]}, possibly in a continuously improving online fashion {[}38{]}.
However, this has seen relatively slow uptake in the marketplace,
despite fairly mature research results. Oracle and DB2 both provide
simple base-table sampling techniques, but do not provide
statistically robust estimation of queries involving more than one
table. Instead of focusing on these features, most vendors have chosen
to enrich their OLAP features instead, which constrain the family of
queries that can be answered quickly, but provide users with 100\%
correct answers.

Another important but more fundamental extension has been to include
``data mining'' techniques in the DBMS. Popular techniques include
statistical clustering, classification, regression, and association
rules {[}14{]}. In addition to the standalone implementation of these
techniques studied in the research literature, there are architectural
challenges in integrating these techniques with rich relational queries
{[}77{]}.

Finally, it is worth noting that the broader computing community has
recently become excited by data parallelism, as embodied by frameworks
like Google's Map-Reduce, Microsoft's Dryad, and the open-source Hadoop
code that is supported by Yahoo! These systems are very much like
shared-nothing-parallel relational query executors, with custom query
operators implemented by the programmers of the application logic. They
also include simple but sensibly engineered approaches to managing the
failure of participating nodes, which is a common occurrence at large
scales. Perhaps the most interesting aspect of this trend is the way
that it is being creatively used for a variety of data-intensive
problems in computing, including text and image processing, and
statistical methods. It will be interesting to see whether other ideas
from database engines get borrowed by users of these frameworks --- for
instance, there is early work at Yahoo! to extend Hadoop with
declarative queries and an optimizer. Innovations built on these
frameworks could be incorporated back into database engines as well.

\hypertarget{storage-management}{%
\chapter{Storage Management}\label{storage-management}}

Two basic types of DBMS storage managers are in commercial use today:
either (1) the DBMS interacts directly with the low-level block-mode
device drivers for the disks (often called raw-mode access), or (2) the
DBMS uses standard OS file system facilities. This decision affects the
DBMS's ability to control storage in both space and time. We consider
these two dimensions in turn, and proceed to discuss the use of the
storage hierarchy in more detail.

\hypertarget{spatial-control}{%
\section{Spatial Control}\label{spatial-control}}

Sequential bandwidth to and from disk is between 10 and 100 times faster
than random access, and this ratio is increasing. Disk density has been
doubling every 18 months and bandwidth rises approximately as the square
root of density (and linearly with rotation speed). Disk arm movement,
however, is improving at a much slower rate --- about 7\%/year {[}67{]}.
As a result, it is critical for the DBMS storage manager to place blocks
on the disk such that queries that require large amounts of data can
access it sequentially. Since the DBMS can understand its workload
access patterns more deeply than the underlying OS, it makes sense for
DBMS architects to exercise full control over the spatial positioning of
database blocks on disk.

The best way for the DBMS to control spatial locality of its data is to
store the data directly to the ``raw'' disk device and avoid the file
system entirely. This works because raw device addresses typically
correspond closely to physical proximity of storage locations. Most
commercial database systems offer this functionality for peak
performance. This technique, although effective, does have some
drawbacks. First, it requires the DBA to devote entire disk partitions
to the DBMS, which makes them unavailable to utilities (backups, etc.)
that need a filesystem interface. Second, ``raw disk'' access interfaces
are often OS-specific, which can make the DBMS more difficult to port.
This is a hurdle, however, that most commercial DBMS vendors overcame
years ago. Finally, developments in the storage industry like RAID,
Storage Area Networks (SAN), and logical volume managers have become
popular. We are now at a point where ``virtual'' disk devices are the
norm in most scenarios today --- the ``raw'' device interface is
actually being intercepted by appliances or software that reposition
data aggressively across one or more physical disks. As a result, the
benefits of explicit physical control by the DBMS have been diluted over
time. We discuss this issue further in Section 7.3.

An alternative to raw disk access is for the DBMS to create a very large
file in the OS file system, and to manage positioning of data as offsets
in that file. The file is essentially treated as a linear array of
disk-resident pages. This avoids some of the disadvantages of raw device
access and still offers reasonably good performance. In most popular
file systems, if you allocate a very large file on an empty disk, the
offsets in that file will correspond fairly closely to physical
proximity of storage regions. Hence this is a good approximation to raw
disk access, without the need to go directly to the raw device
interface. Most virtualized storage systems are also designed to place
close offsets in a file in nearby physical locations. Hence the relative
control lost when using large files rather than raw disks is becoming
less significant over time. Using the file system interface has other
ramifications regarding temporal control, which we discuss in the next
subsection.

As a data point, we recently compared direct raw access with large file
access on a mid-sized system using one of the major commercial DBMSs and
found only a 6\% degradation when running the TPC-C benchmark {[}91{]},
and almost no negative impact on less I/O-intensive workloads. DB2
reports file system overhead as low as 1\% when using Direct I/O (DIO)
and its variants such as concurrent I/O (CIO). Consequently, DBMS
vendors typically no longer recommend raw storage, and few customers run
in this configuration. It remains a supported feature in major
commercial systems primarily for benchmark use.

Some commercial DBMS also allow the database page size to be custom-set
to a size appropriate for the expected work load. Both IBM DB2 and
Oracle support this option. Other commercial systems such as Microsoft
SQL Server do not support multiple page sizes due to the increased
administrative complexity this brings. If tunable page sizes are
supported, the selected size should be a multiple of the page size used
by the file system (or raw device if raw I/O is being used). A
discussion of the appropriate choice of page sizes is given in the
``5-minute rule'' paper which has been subsequently updated to the
``30-minute rule'' {[}27{]}. If the file system is being used rather
than raw device access, special interfaces may be required to write
pages of a different size than that of the file system; the POSIX
\emph{mmap/msync} calls, for example, provide such support.

\hypertarget{temporal-control-buffering}{%
\section{Temporal Control:
Buffering}\label{temporal-control-buffering}}

In addition to controlling \emph{where} on the disk data should be
placed, a DBMS must control \emph{when} data gets physically written to
the disk. As we will discuss in Section 5, a DBMS contains critical
logic that reasons about when to write blocks to disk. Most OS file
systems also provide built-in I/O buffering mechanisms to decide when to
do reads and writes of file blocks. If the DBMS uses standard file
system interfaces for writing, the OS buffering can confound the
intention of the DBMS logic by silently postponing or reordering writes.
This can cause major problems for the DBMS.

The first set of problems regard the \emph{correctness} of the
database's ACID transaction promise: the DBMS cannot guarantee atomic
recovery after software or hardware failure without explicitly
controlling the timing and ordering of disk writes. As we will discuss
in Section 5.3, the \emph{write ahead logging} protocol requires that
writes to the log device must precede corresponding writes to the
database device, and commit requests cannot return to users until commit
log records have been reliably written to the log device.

The second set of problems with OS buffering concern performance, but
have no implications on correctness. Modern OS file systems typically
have some built-in support for \emph{read-ahead} (speculative reads) and
\emph{write-behind} (delayed, batched writes). These are often poorly
suited to DBMS access patterns. File system logic depends on the
contiguity of \emph{physical} byte offsets in files to make read ahead
decisions. DBMS-level I/O facilities can support \emph{logical}
predictive I/O decisions based upon future read requests that are known
at the SQL query processing level but are not easily discernable at the
file system level. For example, logical DBMS-level read-ahead can be
requested when scanning the leaves of a B+-tree (rows are stored in the
leaves of a B+-tree) that are not necessarily contiguous. Logical
read-ahead is easily achieved in DBMS logic by having the DBMS issue I/O
requests in advance of its needs. The query execution plan contains the
relevant information about data access algorithms, and has full
information about future access patterns for the query. Similarly, the
DBMS may want to make its own decisions about when to flush the log
tail, based on considerations that mix issues like lock contention with
I/O throughput. This detailed future access pattern knowledge is
available to the DBMS, but not to the OS file system.

The final performance issues are ``double buffering'' and the high CPU
overhead of memory copies\emph{.} Given that the DBMS has to do its own
buffering carefully for correctness, any additional buffering by the OS
is redundant. This redundancy results in two costs. First, it wastes
system memory by effectively reducing the memory available for doing
useful work. Second, it wastes time and processing resources, by causing
an additional copying step: on reads, data is first copied from the disk
to the OS buffer, and then copied again to the DBMS buffer pool. On
writes, both of these copies are required in reverse.

Copying data in memory can be a serious bottleneck. Copies contribute
latency, consume CPU cycles, and can flood the CPU data cache. This fact
is often a surprise to people who have not operated or implemented a
database system, and assume that main-memory operations are ``free''
compared to disk I/O. But in practice, \emph{throughput in} \emph{a
well-tuned transaction processing DBMS is typically not I/O-bound}. This
is achieved in high-end installations by purchasing sufficient disks and
RAM so that repeated page requests are absorbed by the buffer pool, and
disk I/Os are shared across the disk arms at a rate that can feed the
data appetite of all the processors in the system. Once this kind of
``system balance'' is achieved, I/O latencies cease to be the primary
system throughput bottleneck, and the remaining main-memory bottlenecks
become the limiting factors in the system. Memory copies are becoming a
dominant bottleneck in computer architectures: this is due to the gap in
performance evolution between raw CPU cycles per second per dollar
(which follows Moore's law) and RAM access speed (which trails Moore's
law significantly) {[}67{]}.

The problems of OS buffering have been well known in the database
research literature {[}86{]} and the industry for some time. Most modern
OSs now provide hooks (e.g., the POSIX \emph{mmap suite} calls or the
platform specific DIO and CIO API sets) so that programs such as
database servers can circumvent double-buffering the file cache. This
ensures that writes go through to disk when requested, that double
buffering is avoided, and that the DBMS can control the page replacement
strategy.

\hypertarget{buffer-management}{%
\section{Buffer Management}\label{buffer-management}}

In order to provide efficient access to database pages, every DBMS
implements a large shared buffer pool in its own memory space. In the
early days the buffer pool was statically allocated to an
administratively chosen value, but most commercial DBMSs now dynamically
adjust the buffer pool size based upon system need and available
resources. The buffer pool is organized as an array of \emph{frames},
where each frame is a region of memory the size of a database disk
block. Blocks are copied into the buffer pool from disk without format
change, manipulated in memory in this native format, and later written
back. This translation-free approach avoids CPU bottlenecks in
``marshalling'' and ``unmarshalling'' data to/from disk; perhaps more
importantly, fixed-sized frames sidestep the memory-management
complexities of external fragmentation and compaction that generic
techniques cause.

Associated with the array of buffer pool frames is a hash table that
maps (1) page numbers currently held in memory to their location in the
frame table, (2) the location for that page on backing disk storage, and
(3) some metadata about the page. The metadata includes a \emph{dirty}
\emph{bit} to indicate whether the page has changed since it was read
from disk, and any information needed by the \emph{page replacement
policy} to choose pages to evict when the buffer pool is full. Most
systems also include a \emph{pin count} to signal that the page is not
eligible for participation in the page-replacement algorithm. When the
pin count is non-zero, the page is ``pinned'' in memory and will not be
forced to disk or stolen. This allows the DBMS's worker threads to pin
pages in the buffer pool by incrementing the pin count before
manipulating the page, and then decrementing it thereafter. The intent
is to have only a tiny fraction of the buffer pool pinned at any fixed
point of time. Some systems also offer the ability to pin tables in
memory as an administrative option, which can improve access times to
small, heavily used tables. However, pinned pages reduce the number of
pages available for normal buffer pool activities and can negatively
impact performance as the percentage of pinned pages increases.

Much research in the early days of relational systems focused on the
design of page replacement policies, since the diversity of data access
patterns found in DBMSs render simple techniques ineffective. For
example, certain database operations tend to require full table scans
and, when the scanned table is much larger than the buffer pool, these
operations tend to clear the pool of all commonly referenced data. For
such access patterns, the recency of reference is a poor predictor of
the probability of future reference, so OS page replacement schemes like
LRU and CLOCK were well-known to perform poorly for many database access
patterns {[}86{]}. A variety of alternative schemes were proposed,
including some that attempted to tune the replacement strategy via query
execution plan information {[}15{]}. Today, most systems use simple
enhancements to LRU schemes to account for the case of full table scans.
One that appears in the research literature and has been implemented in
commercial systems is LRU-2 {[}64{]}. Another scheme used in commercial
systems is to have the replacement policy depend on the page type: e.g.,
the root of a B+-tree might be replaced with a different strategy than a
page in a heap file. This is reminiscent of Reiter's Domain Separation
scheme {[}15, 75{]}.

Recent hardware trends, including 64-bit addressing and falling memory
prices, have made very large buffer pools economically possible. This
opens up new opportunities for exploiting large main memory for
efficiency. As a counterpoint, a large and very active buffer pool also
brings more challenges in restart recovery speed and efficient
checkpointing, among other issues. These topics will be discussed
further in Section 6.

\hypertarget{standard-practice-3}{%
\section{Standard Practice}\label{standard-practice-3}}

In the last decade, commercial file systems have evolved to the point
where they can support database storage systems quite well. In the
standard usage model, the system administrator creates a file system on
each disk or logical volume in the DBMS. The DBMS then allocates a
single large file in each of these file systems and controls placement
of data within that file via low-level interfaces like the mmap suite.
The DBMS essentially treats each disk or logical volume as a linear
array of (nearly) contiguous database pages. In this configuration,
modern file systems offer reasonable spatial and temporal control to the
DBMS and this storage model is available in essentially all database
system implementations. The raw disk support remains a common
high-performance option in most database systems, however, its usage is
rapidly narrowing to performance benchmarks only.

\hypertarget{discussion-and-additional-material-3}{%
\section{Discussion and Additional
Material}\label{discussion-and-additional-material-3}}

Database storage subsystems are a very mature technology, but a number
of new considerations have emerged for database storage in recent years,
which have the potential to change data management techniques in a
number of ways.

One key technological change is the emergence of flash memory as an
economically viable random-access persistent storage technology
{[}28{]}. Ever since the early days of database system research, there
has been discussion of sea-changes in DBMS design arising from new
storage technologies replacing disk. Flash memory appears to be both
technologically viable and economically supported by a broad market,
and presents an interesting intermediate cost/performance trade-off
relative to disk and RAM. Flash is the first new persistent storage
medium to succeed in this regard in more than three decades, and hence
its particulars may have significant impact on future DBMS designs.

Another traditional topic that has recently come to the fore is
compression of database data. Early work on the topic focused on
on-disk compression to minimize disk latencies during read, and maximize
the capacity of the database buffer pool. As processor performance has
improved and RAM latencies have not kept pace, it has become
increasingly important to consider keeping data compressed even during
computations, so as to maximize the residency of data in processor
caches as well. But this requires compressed representations that are
amenable to data processing, and query processing internals that
manipulate compressed data. Another wrinkle in relational database
compression is that databases are reorderable sets of tuples, whereas
most work on compression focuses on byte streams without considering
reordering. Recent research on this topic suggests significant promise
for database compression in the near future {[}73{]}.

Finally, outside the traditional relational database market there is
enhanced interest in large-scale but sparse data storage techniques,
where there are logically thousands of columns, the bulk of which are
null for any given row. These scenarios are typically represented via
some kind of set of attribute-value pairs or triples. Instances include
Google's BigTable {[}9{]}, the Tagged Columns used by Microsoft's Active
Directory and Exchange products, and the Resource Description Framework
(RDF) proposed for the ``Semantic Web.'' Common to these approaches are
the use of storage systems that organize disk in terms of the columns of
data tables, rather than rows. The idea of column-oriented storage has
been revived and explored in detail in a number of recent database
research efforts {[}36, 89, 90{]}.

\hypertarget{transactions-concurrency-control-and-recovery}{%
\chapter{Transactions: Concurrency Control and
Recovery}\label{transactions-concurrency-control-and-recovery}}
\chaptermark{Transactions}

Database systems are often accused of being enormous, monolithic
software systems that cannot be split into reusable components. In
practice, database systems --- and the development teams that implement
and maintain them --- do break down into independent components with
documented interfaces between them. This is particularly true of the
interface between the relational query processor and the transactional
storage engine. In most commercial systems these components are written
by different teams and have well-defined interfaces between them.

The truly monolithic piece of a DBMS is the transactional storage
manager that typically encompasses four deeply intertwined components:

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\item
  A lock manager for concurrency control.
\item
  A log manager for recovery.
\item
  A buffer pool for staging database I/Os.
\item
  Access methods for organizing data on disk.
\end{enumerate}

A great deal of ink has been spilled describing the fussy details of
transactional storage algorithms and protocols in database systems. The
reader wishing to become knowledgeable about these systems should read
--- at a minimum --- a basic undergraduate database textbook {[}72{]},
the journal article on the ARIES log protocol {[}59{]}, and at least one
serious article on transactional index concurrency and logging {[}46,
58{]}. More advanced readers will want to consult Gray and Reuter's
textbook on transactions {[}30{]}. To really become an expert, this
reading has to be followed by an implementation effort. We do not dwell
on algorithms and protocols here, but rather survey the roles of these
various components. We focus on the system infrastructure that is often
ignored in the textbooks, highlighting the inter-dependencies between
components that lead to much of the subtlety and complexity in making
the simple protocols workable.

\hypertarget{a-note-on-acid}{%
\section{A Note on ACID}\label{a-note-on-acid}}

Many people are familiar with the term ``ACID transactions,'' a mnemonic
due to Haerder and Reuter {[}34{]}. ACID stands for \emph{Atomicity,
Consistency, Isolation}, and \emph{Durability}. These terms were not
formally defined, and are not mathematical axioms that combine to
guarantee transactional consistency. So it is not important to
carefully distinguish the terms and their relationships. But despite
the informal nature, the ACID acronym is useful to organize a discussion
of transaction systems, and is sufficiently important that we review it
here:

\begin{itemize}
\item
  \emph{Atomicity} is the ``all or nothing'' guarantee for transactions
  --- either all of a transaction's actions commit or none do.
\item
  \emph{Consistency} is an application-specific guarantee; SQL integrity
  constraints are typically used to capture these guarantees in a DBMS.
  Given a definition of consistency provided by a set of constraints, a
  transaction can only commit if it leaves the database in a consistent
  state.
\item
  \emph{Isolation} is a guarantee to application writers that two
  concurrent transactions will not see each other's in-flight
  (not-yet-committed) updates. As a result, applications need not be
  coded ``defensively'' to worry about the ``dirty data'' of other
  concurrent transactions; they can be coded as if the programmer had
  sole access to the database.

\item
  \emph{Durability} is a guarantee that the updates of a committed
  transaction will be visible in the database to subsequent
  transactions independent of subsequent hardware or software errors,
  until such time as they are overwritten by another committed
  transaction.
\end{itemize}

Roughly speaking, modern DBMSs implement isolation via a locking
protocol. Durability is typically implemented via logging and recovery.
Isolation and Atomicity are guaranteed by a combination of locking (to
prevent visibility of transient database states), and logging (to ensure
correctness of data that is visible). Consistency is managed by runtime
checks in the query executor: if a transaction's actions will violate a
SQL integrity constraint, the transaction is aborted and an error code
returned.

\hypertarget{a-brief-review-of-serializability}{%
\section{A Brief Review of
Serializability}\label{a-brief-review-of-serializability}}

We begin our discussion of transactions by briefly reviewing the main
goal of database concurrency control, and proceed in the next section to
describe two of the most important building blocks used to implement
this notion in most multi-user transactional storage managers:
(1) locking and (2) latching.

\emph{Serializability} is the well-defined textbook notion of
correctness for concurrent transactions. It dictates that a sequence of
interleaved actions for multiple committing transactions must correspond
to some serial execution of the transactions --- as though there were no
parallel execution at all. Serializability is a way of describing the
desired behavior of a set of transactions. \emph{Isolation} is the same
idea from the point of view of a single transaction. A transaction is
said to execute in isolation if it does not see any concurrency
anomalies --- the ``I'' of ACID.

Serializability is enforced by the DBMS concurrency control model. There
are three broad techniques of concurrency control enforcement. These are
well-described in textbooks and early survey papers {[}7{]}, but we very
briefly review them here:

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}

\item
  \emph{Strict two-phase locking} (\emph{2PL}): Transactions acquire a
  shared lock on every data record before reading it, and an exclusive
  lock on every data item before writing it. All locks are held until
  the end of the transaction, at which time they are all released
  atomically. A transaction blocks on a wait-queue while waiting to
  acquire a lock.
\end{enumerate}

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\setcounter{enumi}{1}
\item
  \emph{Multi-Version Concurrency Control} (\emph{MVCC}): Transactions
  do not hold locks, but instead are guaranteed a consistent view of the
  database state at some time in the past, even if rows have changed
  since that fixed point in time.
\item
  \emph{Optimistic Concurrency Control} (\emph{OCC}): Multiple
  transactions are allowed to read and update an item without blocking.
  Instead, transactions maintain histories of their reads and writes,
  and before committing a transaction checks history for isolation
  conflicts they may have occurred; if any are found, one of the
  conflicting transactions is rolled back.
\end{enumerate}

Most commercial relational DBMS implement full serializability via 2PL.
The lock manager is the code module responsible for providing the
facilities for 2PL.

In order to reduce locking and lock conflicts some DBMSs support MVCC
or OCC, typically as an add-on to 2PL. In an MVCC model, read locks are
not needed, but this is often implemented at the expense of not
providing full serializability, as we will discuss shortly in Section
4.2.1. To avoid blocking writes behind reads, the write is allowed to
proceed after the previous version of the row is either saved, or
guaranteed to be quickly obtainable otherwise. The in-flight read
transactions continue to use the previous row value as though it were
locked and prevented from being changed. In commercial MVCC
implementations, this stable read value is defined to be either the
value at the start of the read transaction or the value at the start of
that transaction's most recent SQL statement.

While OCC avoids waiting on locks, it can result in higher penalties
during true conflicts between transactions. In dealing with conflicts
across transactions, OCC is like 2PL except that it converts what would
be lock-waits in 2PL into transaction rollbacks. In scenarios where
conflicts are uncommon, OCC performs very well, avoiding overly
conservative wait time. With frequent conflicts, however, excessive
rollbacks and retries negatively impact performance and make it a poor
choice {[}2{]}.

\hypertarget{locking-and-latching}{%
\section{Locking and Latching}\label{locking-and-latching}}

Database locks are simply names used by convention within the system to
represent either physical items (e.g., disk pages) or logical items
(e.g., tuples, files, volumes) that the DBMS manages. Note that any name
can have a lock associated with it --- even if that name represents an
abstract concept. The locking mechanism simply provides a place to
register and check for these names. Every lock is associated with a
transaction and each transaction has a unique transaction ID. Locks come
in different lock ``modes,'' and these modes are associated with a
lock-mode compatibility table. In most systems, this logic is based on
the well-known lock modes that are introduced in Gray's paper on
granularity of locks {[}29{]}. That paper also explains how hierarchical
locks are implemented in commercial systems. Hierarchical locking allows
a single lock to be used to lock an entire table and, at the same time,
support row granularity locks in the same table both efficiently and
correctly.

The lock manager supports two basic calls; \texttt{lock (lockname,
transactionID, mode)}, and \texttt{remove\_transaction (transactionID)}. Note that
because of the strict 2PL protocol, there should not be an individual
call to unlock resources individually --- the \texttt{remove\_transaction()} call
will unlock all resources associated with a transaction. However, as we
discuss in Section 5.2.1, the SQL standard allows for lower degrees of
transaction isolation, and hence there is a need for an \texttt{unlock
(lockname, transactionID)} call as well. There is also a \texttt{lock\_upgrade
(lockname, transactionID, newmode)} call to allow transactions to
``upgrade'' to higher lock modes (e.g., from shared to exclusive mode)
in a two-phase manner, without drop-ping and re-acquiring locks.
Additionally, some systems also support a \texttt{conditional\_lock (lockname,
transactionID, mode)} call. The \texttt{conditional\_lock()} call always returns
immediately, and indicates whether it succeeded in acquiring the lock.
If it did not succeed, the calling DBMS thread is \emph{not} enqueued
waiting for the lock. The use of conditional locks for index concurrency
is discussed in {[}60{]}.

To support these calls, the lock manager maintains two data structures.
A global \emph{lock table} is maintained to hold lock names and their
associated information. The lock table is a dynamic hash table keyed by
(a hash function of) lock names. Associated with each lock is a
\emph{mode} flag to indicate the lock mode, and a \emph{wait queue} of
lock request pairs (transactionID, mode). In addition, the lock manager
maintains a \emph{transaction table} keyed by transactionID, which
contains two items for each transaction \emph{T}: (1) a pointer to
\emph{T}'s DBMS thread state, to allow \emph{T}'s DBMS thread to be
rescheduled when it acquires any locks it is waiting on, and (2) a list
of pointers to all of \emph{T}'s lock requests in the lock table, to
facilitate the removal of all locks associated with a particular
transaction (e.g., upon transaction commit or abort).

Internally, the lock manager makes use of a \emph{deadlock detector}
DBMS thread that periodically examines the lock table to detect
\emph{waits-for} \emph{cycles} (a cycle of DBMS workers where each is
waiting for the next and a cycle is formed). Upon detection of a
deadlock, the deadlock detector aborts one of the deadlocked
transactions. The decision of which dead-locked transaction to abort is
based on heuristics that have been studied in the research literature
{[}76{]}. In shared-nothing and shared-disk systems, either distributed
deadlock detection {[}61{]} or a more primitive timeout-based deadlock
detector is required. A more detailed description of a lock manager
implementation is given in Gray and Reuter's text {[}30{]}.

As an auxiliary to database locks, lighter-weight \emph{latches} are
also provided for mutual exclusion. Latches are more akin to monitors
{[}41{]} or semaphores than locks; they are used to provide exclusive
access to internal DBMS data structures. As an example, the buffer pool
page table has a latch associated with each frame, to guarantee that
only one DBMS thread is replacing a given frame at any time. Latches are
used in the implementation of locks and to briefly stabilize internal
data structures potentially being concurrently modified.

Latches differ from locks in a number of ways:

\begin{itemize}
\item
  Locks are kept in the lock table and located via hash tables; latches
  reside in memory near the resources they protect, and are accessed via
  direct addressing.

  \item
    In a strict 2PL implementation, locks are subject to the strict 2PL
    protocol. Latches may be acquired or dropped during a transaction
    based on special-case internal logic.
  \item
    Lock acquisition is entirely driven by data access, and hence the
    order and lifetime of lock acquisitions is largely in the hands of
    applications and the query optimizer. Latches are acquired by
    specialized code inside the DBMS, and the DBMS internal code issues
    latch requests and releases strategically.
  \item
    Locks are allowed to produce deadlock, and lock deadlocks are
    \emph{detected} and resolved via transactional restart. Latch
    deadlock must be \emph{avoided} ; the occurrence of a latch
    deadlock represents a bug in the DBMS code.
  \item
    Latches are implemented using an atomic hardware instruction or, in
    rare cases, where this is not available, via mutual exclusion in the
    OS kernel.
  \item
    Latch calls take at most a few dozen CPU cycles whereas lock
    requests take hundreds of CPU cycles.
  \item
    The lock manager tracks all the locks held by a transaction and
    automatically releases the locks in case the transaction throws an
    exception, but internal DBMS routines that manipulate latches must
    carefully track them and include manual cleanup as part of their
    exception handling.
  \item
    Latches are not tracked and so cannot be automatically released if
    the task faults.
\end{itemize}

The latch API supports the routines \texttt{latch(object, mode)},
\texttt{unlatch(object)}, and \texttt{conditional\_latch(object, mode)}. In most DBMSs, the
choices of latch modes include only shared or exclusive. Latches
maintain a mode, and a waitqueue of DBMS threads waiting on the latch.
The latch and unlatch calls work as one might expect. The
\texttt{conditional\_latch()} call is analogous to the \texttt{conditional\_lock()}
call described above, and is also used for index concurrency {[}60{]}.

\hypertarget{transaction-isolation-levels}{%
\subsection{Transaction Isolation
Levels}\label{transaction-isolation-levels}}

Very early in the development of the transaction concept, attempts were
made to increase concurrency by providing ``weaker'' semantics than
serializability. The challenge was to provide robust definitions of the
semantics in these cases. The most influential effort in this regard was
Gray's early work on ``Degrees of Consistency'' {[}29{]}. That work
attempted to provide both a declarative definition of consistency
degrees, and implementations in terms of locking. Influenced by this
work, the ANSI SQL standard defines four ``Isolation Levels'':

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}

\item
  \emph{READ UNCOMMITTED}: A transaction may read any version of data,
  committed or not. This is achieved in a locking
implementation by read requests proceeding without acquiring any
locks.\footnote{In all isolation levels, write requests are preceded by write locks
that are held until end of transaction.}

\item
  \emph{READ COMMITTED}: A transaction may read \emph{any committed}
  version of data. Repeated reads of an object may result in different
  (committed) versions. This is achieved by read requests acquiring a
  read lock before accessing an object, and unlocking it immediately
  after access.
\item
  \emph{REPEATABLE READ}: A transaction will read only one version of
  committed data; once the transaction reads an object, it will always
  read the same version of that object. This is achieved by read
  requests acquiring a read lock before accessing an object, and holding
  the lock until end-of-transaction.
\item
  \emph{SERIALIZABLE}: Full serializable access is guaranteed.
\end{enumerate}

At first blush, REPEATABLE READ seems to provide full serializability,
but this is not the case. Early in the System R project {[}3{]}, a
problem arose that was dubbed the ``phantom problem.'' In the phantom
problem, a transaction accesses a relation more than once with the same
predicate in the same transaction, but sees new ``phantom'' tuples on
re-access that were not seen on the first access. This is because
two-phase locking at tuple-level granularity does not prevent the
insertion of new tuples into a table. Two-phase locking of tables
prevents phantoms, but table-level locking can be restrictive in cases
where transactions access only a few tuples via an index. We investigate
this issue further in Section 5.4.3 when we discuss locking in indexes.

Commercial systems provide the four isolation levels above via
locking-based implementations of concurrency control. Unfortunately, as
noted by Berenson et al. {[}6{]}, neither the early work by Gray nor the
ANSI standard achieve the goal of providing truly declarative
definitions. Both rely in subtle ways on an assumption that a locking
scheme is used for concurrency control, as opposed to an optimistic
{[}47{]} or multi-version {[}74{]} concurrency scheme. This implies that
the proposed semantics are ill-defined. The interested reader is
encouraged to look at the Berenson paper which discusses some of the
problems in the SQL standard specifications, as well as the research by
Adya et al. {[}1{]}, which provides a new, cleaner approach to the
problem.

In addition to the standard ANSI SQL isolation levels, various vendors
provide additional levels that have proven popular in particular cases.

\begin{itemize}

\item
  \emph{CURSOR STABILITY}: This level is intended to solve the ``lost
  update'' problem of READ COMMITTED. Consider two transactions T1 and
  T2. T1 runs in READ COMMITTED mode, reads an object X (say the value
  of a bank account), remembers its value, and subsequently writes
  object X based on the remembered value (say adding \$100 to the
  original account value). T2 reads and writes X as well (say
  subtracting \$300 from the account). If T2's actions happen between
  T1's read and T1's write, then the effect of T2's update will be lost
  --- the final value of the account in our example will be up by \$100,
  instead of being down by \$200 as desired. A transaction in CURSOR
  STABILITY mode holds a lock on the most recently read item on a query
  cursor; the lock is automatically dropped when the cursor is moved
  (e.g., via another FETCH) or the transaction terminates. CURSOR
  STABILITY allows the transaction to do read-- think--write sequences
  on individual items without intervening updates from other
  transactions.
\end{itemize}

\begin{itemize}
\item
  \emph{SNAPSHOT ISOLATION}: A transaction running in SNAPSHOT
  ISOLATION mode operates on a version of the database as it existed at
  the time the transaction began; subsequent updates by other
  transactions are invisible to the transaction. This is one of the
  major uses of MVCC in production database systems. When the
  transaction starts, it gets a unique \emph{start-timestamp} from a
  monotonically increasing counter; when it commits it gets a unique
  \emph{end-timestamp} from the counter. The transaction commits only if
  no other transaction with an overlapping \emph{start/end-transaction}
  pair wrote data that this transaction also wrote. This isolation mode
  depends upon a multi-version concurrency implementation, rather than
  locking. These schemes typically coexist, however, in systems that
  support SNAPSHOT ISOLATION.
\item
  \emph{READ CONSISTENCY}: This is an MVCC scheme defined by Oracle; it
  is subtly different from SNAPSHOT ISOLATION. In the Oracle scheme,
  each SQL \emph{statement} (of which there may be many in a single
  transaction) sees the most recently committed values as of the start
  of the statement. For statements that fetch from cursors, the cursor
  set is based on the values as of the time it is opened. This is
  implemented by maintaining multiple logical versions of individual
  tuples, with a single transaction possibly referencing multiple
  versions of a single tuple. Rather than storing each version that
  might be needed, Oracle stores only the most recent version. If an
  older version is needed, it produces the older version by taking the
  current version and ``rolling it back'' by applying undo log records
  as needed. Modifications are maintained via long-term write locks, so
  when two transactions want to write the same object, the first writer
  ``wins'' and the second writer must wait for the transaction
  completion of the first writer before its write proceeds. By contrast,
  in SNAPSHOT ISOLATION the first committer ``wins'' rather than the
  first writer.
\end{itemize}

Weak isolation schemes can provide higher concurrency than full
serializability. As a result, some systems even use weak consistency as
the default. For example, Microsoft SQL Server defaults to READ
COMMITTED. The downside is that Isolation (in the ACID sense) is not
guaranteed. Hence application writers need to reason about the
subtleties of the schemes to ensure that their transactions run
correctly. This can be tricky given the operationally defined semantics
of the schemes, and can lead to applications being more difficult to
move between DBMSs.

\hypertarget{log-manager}{%
\section{Log Manager}\label{log-manager}}

The log manager is responsible for maintaining the durability of
committed transactions, for facilitating the rollback of aborted
transactions to ensure atomicity, and for recovering from system failure
or non-orderly shutdown. To provide these features, the log manager
maintains a sequence of log records on disk, and a set of data
structures in memory. In order to support correct behavior after a
crash, the memory-resident data structures obviously need to be
re-creatable from persistent data in the log and the database.

Database logging is an extremely complex and detail-oriented topic. The
canonical reference on database logging is the journal paper on ARIES
{[}59{]}, and a database expert should be familiar with the details of
that paper. The ARIES paper not only explains logging protocol, but also
provides discussion of alternative design possibilities, and the
problems that they can cause. This makes for dense, but ultimately
rewarding reading. As a more digestible introduction, the Ramakrishnan
and Gehrke textbook {[}72{]} provides a description of the basic ARIES
protocol without side discussions or refinements. Here we discuss some
of the basic ideas in recovery, and try to explain the complexity gap
between textbook and journal descriptions.

The standard theme of database recovery is to use a Write-Ahead Logging
(WAL) protocol. The WAL protocol consists of three very simple rules:

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}

\item
  Each modification to a database page should generate a log record, and
  the log record must be flushed to the log device \emph{before} the
  database page is flushed.
\end{enumerate}

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\setcounter{enumi}{1}
\item
  Database log records must be flushed in order; log record \emph{r}
  cannot be flushed until all log records preceding \emph{r} are
  flushed.
\item
  Upon a transaction commit request, a commit log record must be flushed
  to the log device \emph{before} the commit request returns
  successfully.
\end{enumerate}

Many people only remember the first of these rules, but all three are
required for correct behavior.

The first rule ensures that the actions of incomplete transactions can
be \emph{undone} in the event of a transaction abort, to ensure
atomicity. The combination of rules (2) and (3) ensure durability: the
actions of a committed transaction can be \emph{redone} after a system
crash if they are not yet reflected in the database.

Given these simple principles, it is surprising that efficient database
logging is as subtle and detailed as it is. In practice, however, the
simple story above is complicated by the need for extreme performance.
The challenge is to guarantee efficiency in the ``fast path'' for
transactions that commit, while also providing high-performance rollback
for aborted transactions, and quick recovery after crashes. Logging gets
even more complex when application-specific optimizations are added,
e.g., to support improved performance for fields that can only be
incremented or decremented (``escrow transactions'').

In order to maximize the speed of the fast path, most commercial
database systems operate in a mode that Haerder and Reuter call
``DIRECT, STEAL/NOT-FORCE'' {[}34{]}: (a) data objects are updated in
place, (b) unpinned buffer pool frames can be ``stolen'' (and the
modified data pages written back to disk) even if they contain
uncommitted data, and (c) buffer pool pages need \emph{not} be
``forced'' (flushed) to the database before a commit request returns to
the user. These policies keep the data in the location chosen by the
DBA, and they give the buffer manager and disk scheduler full latitude
to decide on memory management and I/O policies without consideration
for transactional correctness. These features can have major performance
benefits, but require that the log manager efficiently handle all the
subtleties of \emph{undoing} the flushes of stolen pages from aborted
transactions, and \emph{redoing} the changes to not-forced pages of
committed transactions that are lost on crash. One optimization used by
some DBMSs is to combine the scalability advantages of a DIRECT,
STEAL/NOT-FORCE system with the performance of a DIRECT
NOT-STEAL/NOT-FORCE system. In these systems, pages are not stolen
unless there are no clean pages remaining in the buffer pool, in which
case the system degrades back to a STEAL policy with the additional
overhead described above.

Another fast-path challenge in logging is to keep log records as small
as possible, in order to increase the throughput of log I/O activity. A
natural optimization is to log \emph{logical} operations (e.g., ``insert
(Bob, \$25000) into EMP'') rather than physical operations (e.g., the
after-images for all byte ranges modified via the tuple insertion,
including bytes on both heap file and index blocks.) The trade-off is
that the logic to redo and undo logical operations becomes quite
involved. This can severely degrade performance during transaction abort
and database recovery.\footnote{Note also that logical log records must always have well-known,
inverse functions if they need to participate in undo processing.} In practice, a mixture of
physical and logical logging (so-called ``physiological'' logging) is
used. In ARIES, physical logging is generally used to support REDO, and
logical logging is used to support UNDO. This is part of the ARIES rule
of ``repeating history'' during recovery to reach the crash state, and
then rolling back transactions from that point.

Crash recovery is required to restore the database to a consistent state
after a system failure or non-orderly shutdown. As explained above,
recovery is theoretically achieved by replaying history and stepping
through log records from the first all the way to the most recent
record. This technique is correct, but not very efficient since the log
could be arbitrarily long. Rather than starting from the very first log
record, a correct result will be obtained by starting recovery at the
oldest of these two log records: (1) the log record describing the
earliest change to the oldest dirty page in the buffer pool, and (2) the
log record representing the start of the oldest transaction in the
system. The sequence number of this point is called the \emph{recovery
log sequence} \emph{number} (recovery LSN). Since computing and
recording the recovery LSN incurs overhead, and since we know that the
recovery LSN is
monotonically increasing, we do not need to keep it always up to date.
Instead we compute it at periodic intervals called \emph{checkpoints}.

A na\"ive checkpoint would force all dirty buffer pool pages and then
compute and store the recovery LSN. With a large buffer pool, this could
lead to delays of several seconds to complete the I/O of the pending
pages. So a more efficient ``fuzzy'' scheme for checkpointing is
required, along with logic to correctly bring the checkpoint up to the
most recent consistent state by processing as little of the log as
possible. ARIES uses a very clever scheme in which the actual checkpoint
records are quite tiny, containing just enough information to initiate
the log analysis process and to enable the recreation of main-memory
data structures lost at crash time. During an ARIES fuzzy checkpoint,
the recovery LSN is computed but no buffer pool pages need to be
synchronously written out. A separate policy is used to determine when
to asynchronously write out old dirty buffer pool pages.

Note that rollback will require that log records be written. This can
lead to difficult situations where the in-flight transactions cannot
proceed due to running out of log space but they cannot be rolled back
either. This situation is typically avoided through space reservation
schemes, however, these schemes are hard to get and keep correct as the
system evolves through multiple releases.

Finally, the task of logging and recovery is further complicated by the
fact that a database is not merely a set of user data tuples on disk
pages; it also includes a variety of ``physical'' information that
allows it to manage its internal disk-based data structures. We discuss
this in the context of index logging in the next section.

\hypertarget{locking-and-logging-in-indexes}{%
\section{Locking and Logging in
Indexes}\label{locking-and-logging-in-indexes}}

Indexes are physical storage structures for accessing data in the
database. The indexes themselves are invisible to database application
developers, except inasmuch as they improve performance or enforce
uniqueness constraints. Developers and application programs cannot
directly observe or manipulate entries in indexes. This allows indexes
to be managed via more efficient (and complex) transactional schemes.
The only invariant that index concurrency and recovery needs to preserve
is that the index always returns transactionally consistent tuples from
the database.

\hypertarget{latching-in-b-trees}{%
\subsection{Latching in B+-Trees}\label{latching-in-b-trees}}

A well-studied example of this issue arises in B+-tree latching.
B+-trees consist of database disk pages that are accessed via the buffer
pool, just like data pages. Hence one scheme for index concurrency
control is to use two-phase locks on index pages. This means that every
transaction that touches the index needs to lock the root of the B+-tree
until commit time --- a recipe for limited concurrency. A variety of
latch-based schemes have been developed to work around this problem
without setting any transactional locks on index pages. The key insight
in these schemes is that modifications to the tree's \emph{physical
structure} (e.g., splitting pages) can be made in a non-transactional
manner as long as all concurrent transactions continue to find the
correct data at the leaves. There are roughly three approaches to this:

\begin{itemize}
\item
  \emph{Conservative schemes}: Multiple transactions wanting to access
  the same pages are allowed only if they can be guaranteed not to
  conflict in their use of a page's content. One such conflict is a
  reading transaction that wants to traverse a fully packed internal
  page of the tree while a concurrent inserting transaction is operating
  below that page and might need to split that page {[}4{]}. These
  conservative schemes sacrifice too much concurrency compared with the
  more recent ideas below.
\item
  \emph{Latch-coupling schemes}: The tree traversal logic latches each
  node before it is visited, only unlatching a node when the next node
  to be visited has been successfully latched. This scheme is sometimes
  called latch ``crabbing,'' because of the crablike movement of
  ``holding'' a node in the tree, ``grabbing'' its child, releasing the
  parent, and repeating. Latch coupling is used in some commercial
  systems; IBM's ARIES-IM version is well-described {[}60{]}. ARIES-IM
  includes some fairly intricate details and corner cases --- on
  occasion it has to restart traversals after splits, and even set (very
  short-term) tree-wide latches.
\end{itemize}

\begin{itemize}

\item
  \emph{Right-link schemes}: Simple additional structures are added to
  the B+-tree to minimize the requirement for latches and re-traversals.
  In particular, a link is added from each node to its right-hand
  neighbor. During traversal, right-link schemes do no latch-coupling
  --- each node is latched, read, and unlatched. The main intuition in
  right-link schemes is that if a traversing transaction follows a
  pointer to a node \emph{n} and finds that \emph{n} was split in the
  interim, the traversing transaction can detect this fact, and ``move
  right'' via the right-links to find the new correct location in the
  tree {[}46, 50{]}. Some systems support reverse traversal using
  back-links as well.
\end{itemize}

Kornacker et al. {[}46{]} provide a detailed discussion of the
distinctions between latch-coupling and right-link schemes, and point
out that latch-coupling is only applicable to B+-trees, and will not
work for index trees over more complex data, e.g., geographic data that
does not have a single linear order. The PostgreSQL Generalized Search
Tree (GiST) implementation is based on Kornacker et al.'s extensible
right-link scheme.

\hypertarget{logging-for-physical-structures}{%
\subsection{Logging for Physical
Structures}\label{logging-for-physical-structures}}

In addition to special-case concurrency logic, indexes also use
special-case logging logic. This logic makes logging and recovery much
more efficient, at the expense of increased code complexity. The main
idea is that structural index changes need not be undone when the
associated transaction is aborted; such changes can often have no effect
on the database tuples seen by other transactions. For example, if a
B+-tree page is split during an inserting transaction that subsequently
aborts, there is no pressing need to undo the split during the abort
processing.

This raises the challenge of labeling some log records \emph{redo-only}.
During any undo processing of the log, the redo-only changes can be left
in place. ARIES provides an elegant mechanism for these scenarios,
called \emph{nested top actions}, that allows the recovery process to
``jump over'' log records for physical structure modifications during
recovery without any special-case code.

This same idea is used in other contexts, including heap files. An
insertion into a heap file may require that the file be extended on
disk. To capture this, changes must be made to the file's \emph{extent
map}. This is a data structure on disk that points to the runs of
contiguous blocks that constitute the file. These changes to the extent
map need not be undone if the inserting transaction aborts. The fact
that the file has become larger is a transactionally invisible
side-effect, and may in fact be useful for absorbing future insert
traffic.

\hypertarget{next-key-locking-physical-surrogates-for-logical-properties}{%
\subsection{Next-Key Locking: Physical Surrogates for Logical
Properties}\label{next-key-locking-physical-surrogates-for-logical-properties}}

We close this section with a final index concurrency problem that
illustrates a subtle but significant idea. The challenge is to provide
full serializability (including phantom protection) while allowing for
tuple-level locks and the use of indexes. Note that this technique only
applies to full serializability and is not required or used in relaxed
isolation models.

The phantom problem can arise when a transaction accesses tuples via an
index. In such cases, the transaction typically does not lock the entire
table, just the tuples in the table that are accessed via the index
(e.g., ``Name BETWEEN `Bob' AND `Bobby'\,''). In the absence of a
table-level lock, other transactions are free to insert new tuples into
the table (e.g., ``Name=`Bobbie'\,''). When these new inserts fall
within the value-range of a query predicate, they will appear in
subsequent accesses via that predicate. Note that the phantom problem
relates to the visibility of database tuples, and hence is a problem
with locks, not just latches. In principle, what is needed is the
ability to somehow lock the \emph{logical space} represented by the
original query's search predicate, e.g., the range of all possible
strings that fall between ``Bob'' and ``Bobby'' in lexicographic order.
Unfortunately, predicate locking is expensive, since it requires a way
to compare arbitrary predicates for overlap. This cannot be done with a
hash-based lock table {[}3{]}.

A common approach to the phantom problem in B+-trees is called
\emph{next-key locking}. In next-key locking, the index insertion code
is modified so that an insertion of a tuple with index key \emph{k} must
allocate an
exclusive lock on the next-key tuple that exists in the index, where the
next-key tuple has the lowest key greater than \emph{k}. This protocol
ensures that subsequent insertions cannot appear in between two tuples
that were returned previously to an active transaction. It also ensures
that tuples cannot be inserted just below the lowest-keyed tuple
previously returned. If no ``Bob'' key was found on the first access,
for example, then one should not be found on subsequent accesses within
the same transaction. One case remains: the insertion of tuples just
\emph{above} the highest-keyed tuple previously returned. To protect
against this case, the next-key locking protocol requires read
transactions get a shared lock on the next-key tuple in the index as
well. In this scenario, the next-key tuple is the minimum-keyed tuple
that does \emph{not} satisfy the query predicate. Updates behave
logically as delete followed by insert although optimizations are both
possible and common.

Next key locking, although effective, does suffer from over-locking and
this can be problematic with some workloads. For example, if we were
scanning records from key 1 through key 10, but the column being indexed
had only the keys 1, 5, and 100 stored, the entire range from 1 to 100
would be read-locked since 100 is the next key after 10.

Next-key locking is not simply a clever hack. It is an example of using
a physical object (a currently-stored tuple) as a \emph{surrogate} for a
logical concept (a predicate). The benefit is that simple system
infrastructure like hash-based lock tables can be used for more complex
purposes, simply by modifying the lock protocol. Designers of complex
software systems should keep this general approach of logical surrogates
in their ``bag of tricks'' when such semantic information is available.

\hypertarget{interdependencies-of-transactional-storage}{%
\section{Interdependencies of Transactional
Storage}\label{interdependencies-of-transactional-storage}}

We claimed early in this section that transactional storage systems are
monolithic, deeply entwined systems. In this section, we discuss a few
of the interdependencies between the three main aspects of a
transactional storage system: concurrency control, recovery management,
and access methods. In a happier world, it would be possible to identify
narrow APIs between these modules that would allow the implementations
behind those APIs to be swappable. Our examples in this section show
that this is not easily done. We do not intend to provide an exhaustive
list of interdependencies here; generating and proving the completeness
of such a list would be a very challenging exercise. We do hope,
however, to illustrate some of the twisty logic of transactional
storage, and thereby justify the resulting monolithic implementations in
commercial DBMSs.

We begin by considering concurrency control and recovery alone without
the further complication of access methods. Even with this
simplification, components are deeply intertwined. One manifestation of
the relationship between concurrency and recovery is that write-ahead
logging makes implicit assumptions about the locking protocol.
Write-ahead logging requires \emph{strict} two-phase locking, and will
not operate correctly with non-strict two-phase locking. To see this,
consider what happens during the rollback of an aborted transaction.
The recovery code begins processing the log records of the aborted
transaction, undoing its modifications. Typically this requires changing
pages or tuples that the transaction previously modified. In order to
make these changes, the transaction needs to have locks on those pages
or tuples. In a non-strict 2PL scheme, if the transaction drops any
locks before aborting, it may be unable to re-acquire the locks it needs
to complete the rollback process.

Access methods complicate things yet further. It is a significant
intellectual and engineering challenge to take a textbook access method
algorithm (e.g., linear hashing {[}53{]} or R-trees {[}32{]}) and
implement a correct, high-concurrency, recoverable version in a
transactional system. For this reason, most leading DBMSs still only
implement heap files and B+-trees as transactionally protected access
methods; PostgreSQL's GiST implementation is a notable exception. As we
illustrated above for B+-trees, high-performance implementations of
transactional indexes include intricate protocols for latching, locking,
and logging. The B+-trees in serious DBMSs are riddled with calls to the
concurrency and recovery code. Even simple access methods like heap
files have some tricky concurrency and recovery issues surrounding the
data structures that describe their contents (e.g., extent maps). This
logic is not generic to all access methods --- it is very much
customized to the specific logic of the access method and its particular
implementation.

Concurrency control in access methods has been well-developed only for
locking-oriented schemes. Other concurrency schemes (e.g., Optimistic or
Multi-version concurrency control) do not usually consider access
methods at all, or mention them only in an offhanded and impractical
fashion {[}47{]}. Hence mixing and matching different concurrency
mechanisms for a given access method implementation is difficult.

Recovery logic in access methods is particularly system-specific: the
timing and contents of access method log records depend upon fine
details of the recovery protocol, including the handling of structure
modifications (e.g., whether they get undone upon transaction rollback,
and if not how that is avoided), and the use of physical and logical
logging. Even for a specific access method like a B+-tree, the recovery
and concurrency logic are intertwined. In one direction, the recovery
logic depends upon the concurrency protocol: if the recovery manager has
to restore a physically consistent state of the tree, then it needs to
know what inconsistent states could possibly arise, to bracket those
states appropriately with log records for atomicity (e.g., via nested
top actions). In the opposite direction, the concurrency protocol for an
access method may be dependent on the recovery logic. For example, the
right-link scheme for B+-trees assume that pages in the tree never
``re-merge'' after they split. This assumption requires that the
recovery scheme use a mechanism such as nested top actions to avoid
undoing splits generated by aborted transactions.

The one bright spot in this picture is that buffer management is
relatively well-isolated from the rest of the components of the storage
manager. As long as pages are pinned correctly, the buffer manager is
free to encapsulate the rest of its logic and re-implement it as needed.
For example, the buffer manager has freedom in the choice of pages to
replace (because of the STEAL property), and the scheduling of page
flushes (thanks to the NOT FORCE property). Achieving this isolation, of
course, is the direct cause of much of the complexity in concurrency and
recovery. So this spot is perhaps less bright than it seems.

\hypertarget{standard-practice-4}{%
\section{Standard Practice}\label{standard-practice-4}}

All production databases today support ACID transactions. As a rule,
they use write-ahead logging for durability, and two-phase locking for
concurrency control. An exception is PostgreSQL, which uses
multi-version concurrency control throughout. Oracle pioneered the
limited use of multi-version concurrency side-by-side with locking as a
way to offer relaxed consistency models like Snapshot Isolation and Read
Consistency; the popularity of these modes among users has led to their
adoption in more than one commercial DBMS, and in Oracle this is the
default. B+-tree indexing are standard in all of the production
databases, and most of the commercial database engines offer some form
of multi-dimensional index either embedded in the system or as a
``plugin'' module. Only PostgreSQL offers high-concurrency
multi-dimensional and text indexing, via its GiST implementation.

MySQL is unique in actively supporting a variety of storage managers
underneath, to the point where DBAs often choose different storage
engines for different tables in the same database. Its default storage
engine, MyISAM, only supports table-level locking, but is considered the
high-performance choice for read-mostly workloads. For read/write
workloads, the InnoDB storage engine is recommended; it offers row-level
locking. (InnoDB was purchased by Oracle some years ago, but remains
open-source and free for use for the time being.) Neither of the MySQL
storage engines provide the well-known hierarchical locking scheme
developed for System R {[}29{]}, despite its universal use in the other
database systems. This makes the choice between InnoDB and MyISAM tricky
for MySQL DBAs, and in some mixed-workload cases neither engine can
provide good lock granularity, requiring the DBA to develop a physical
design using multiple tables and/or database replication to support both
scans and high-selectivity index access. MySQL also supports storage
engines for main-memory and cluster-based storage, and some third-party
vendors have announced MySQL-compliant storage engines, but most of the
energy in the MySQL userbase today is focused on MyISAM and InnoDB.

\hypertarget{discussion-and-additional-material-4}{%
\section{Discussion and Additional
Material}\label{discussion-and-additional-material-4}}

Transaction mechanisms are by now an extremely mature topic, and most of
the possible tricks have been tried in one form or another over the
years; new designs tend to involve permutations and combinations of
existing ideas. Perhaps the most noticeable changes in this space are
due to the rapidly dropping price of RAM. This increases the motivation
to keep a large fraction of the ``hot'' portions of the database in
memory and run at memory speeds, which complicates the challenge of
getting data flushed to persistent storage often enough to keep restart
times low. The role of flash memory in transaction management is part of
this evolving balancing act.

An interesting development in recent years is the relatively broad
adoption of write-ahead logging in the OSs community, typically under
the rubric of \emph{Journaling} file systems. These have become standard
options in essentially all OSs today. Since these filesystems typically
still do not support transactions over file data, it is interesting to
see how and where they use write-ahead logging for durability and
atomicity. The interested reader is referred to {[}62, 71{]} for further
reading. Another interesting direction in this regard is the work on
\emph{Stasis} {[}78{]}, which attempts to better modularize ARIES-style
logging and recovery and make it available to systems programmers for a
wide variety of uses.

\hypertarget{shared-components}{%
\chapter{Shared Components}\label{shared-components}}

In this section, we cover a number of shared components and utilities
that are present in nearly all commercial DBMS, but rarely discussed in
the literature.

\hypertarget{catalog-manager}{%
\section{Catalog Manager}\label{catalog-manager}}

The database catalog holds information about data in the system and is a
form of \emph{metadata}. The catalog records the names of basic entities
in the system (users, schemas, tables, columns, indexes, etc.) and their
relationships, and is itself stored as a set of tables in the database.
By keeping the metadata in the same format as the data, the system is
made both more compact and simpler to use: users can employ the same
language and tools to investigate the metadata that they use for other
data, and the internal system code for managing the metadata is largely
the same as the code for managing other tables. This code and language
reuse is an important lesson that is often overlooked in early stage
implementations, typically to the significant regret of developers later
on. One of the authors witnessed this mistake yet again in an industrial
setting within the last decade.

The basic catalog data is treated somewhat differently from normal
tables for efficiency reasons. High-traffic portions of the catalog are
often materialized in main memory as needed, typically in data
structures that ``denormalize'' the flat relational structure of the
catalogs into a main-memory network of objects. This lack of data
independence in memory is acceptable because the in-memory data
structures are used in a stylized fashion only by the query parser and
optimizer. Additional catalog data is cached in query plans at parsing
time, again often in a denormalized form suited to the query. Moreover,
catalog tables are often subject to special-case transactional tricks to
minimize ``hot spots'' in transaction processing.

Catalogs can become formidably large in commercial applications. One
major Enterprise Resource Planning application, for example, has over
60,000 tables, with between 4 and 8 columns per table, and typically two
or three indexes per table.

\hypertarget{memory-allocator}{%
\section{Memory Allocator}\label{memory-allocator}}

The textbook presentation of DBMS memory management tends to focus
entirely on the buffer pool. In practice, database systems allocate
significant amounts of memory for other tasks as well. The correct
management of this memory is both a programming burden and a performance
issue. Selinger-style query optimization can use a great deal of memory,
for example, to build up state during dynamic programming. Query
operators like hashjoins and sorts allocate significant memory at
runtime. Memory allocation in commercial systems is made more efficient
and easier to debug via the use of a \emph{context-based} memory
allocator.

A memory context is an in-memory data structure that maintains a list of
\emph{regions} of contiguous virtual memory, often called memory pools.
Each region can have a small header that contains either a context label
or a pointer to the context header structure. The basic API for memory
contexts includes calls to:

\begin{itemize}

\item
  \emph{Create a context with a given name or type}. The context type
  might advise the allocator how to efficiently handle memory
  allocation. For example, the contexts for the query optimizer grow via
  small increments, while contexts for hashjoins allocate their memory
  in a few large batches. Based on such knowledge, the allocator can
  choose to allocate bigger or smaller regions at a time.
\end{itemize}

\begin{itemize}
\item
  \emph{Allocate a chunk of memory within a context}. This allocation
  will return a pointer to memory (much like the traditional \texttt{malloc()}
  call). That memory may come from an existing region in the context.
  Or, if no such space exists in any region, the allocator will ask the
  OS for a new region of memory, label it, and link it into the context
\item
  \emph{Delete a chunk of memory within a context.} This may or may not
  cause the context to delete the corresponding region. Deletion from
  memory contexts is somewhat unusual. A more typical behavior is to
  delete an entire context.
\item
  \emph{Delete a context}. This first frees all of the regions
  associated with the context, and then deletes the context header.
\item
  \emph{Reset a context}. This retains the context, but returns it to
  the state of original creation, typically by deallocating all
  previously allocated regions of memory.
\end{itemize}

Memory contexts provide important software engineering advantages. The
most important is that they serve as a lower-level,
programmer-controllable alternative to garbage collection. For example,
the developers writing the optimizer can allocate memory in an optimizer
context for a particular query, without worrying about how to free the
memory later on. When the optimizer has picked the best plan, it can
copy the plan into memory from a separate executor context for the
query, and then simply delete the query's optimizer context. This saves
the trouble of writing code to carefully walk all the optimizer data
structures and delete their components. It also avoids tricky memory
leaks that can arise from bugs in such code. This feature is very useful
for the naturally ``phased'' behavior of query execution, where control
proceeds from parser to optimizer to executor, with a number of
allocations in each context followed by a context deletion.

Note that memory contexts actually provide more control than most
garbage collectors as developers can control both \emph{spatial} and
\emph{temporal} locality of deallocation. The context mechanism itself
provides the spatial control that allows the programmer to separate
memory into logical units. Temporal control follows from programmers
being allowed to issue context deletions when appropriate. By contrast,
garbage collectors typically work on all of a program's memory, and
make their own decisions about when to run. This is one of the
frustrations of attempting to write server-quality code in Java
{[}81{]}.

Memory contexts also provide performance advantages on platforms where
the overhead for \texttt{malloc()} and \texttt{free()} is relatively high. In particular,
memory contexts can use semantic knowledge (via the context type) of how
memory will be allocated and deallocated, and may call \texttt{malloc()} and
\texttt{free()} accordingly to minimize OS overheads. Some components of a
database system (e.g., the parser and optimizer) allocate a large number
of small objects, and then free them all at once via a context deletion.
Calls to \texttt{free()} many small objects are rather expensive on most
platforms. A memory allocator can instead call \texttt{malloc()} to allocate
large regions, and apportion the resulting memory to its callers. The
relative lack of memory deallocations means that the compaction logic
that \texttt{malloc()} and \texttt{free()} use is not needed. And when the context is
deleted, only a few \texttt{free()} calls are required to remove the large
regions.

The interested reader may want to browse the open-source PostgreSQL
code. This utilizes a fairly sophisticated memory allocator.

\hypertarget{a-note-on-memory-allocation-for-query-operators}{%
\subsection{A Note on Memory Allocation for Query
Operators}\label{a-note-on-memory-allocation-for-query-operators}}

Vendors differ philosophically in their memory-allocation schemes for
space-intensive operators such as hash joins and sorts. Some systems
(e.g., DB2 for zSeries) allow the DBA to control the amount of RAM that
such operations will use, and guarantee that each query gets that amount
of RAM when executed. The admission control policy ensures this
guarantee. In such systems, operators allocate their memory from the
heap via the memory allocator. These systems provide good performance
stability, but force the DBA to (statically) decide how to balance
physical memory across various subsystems such as the buffer pool and
the query operators.

Other systems (e.g., MS SQL Server), take the memory allocation task out
of the DBA's hands and manage these allocations automatically. These
systems attempt to intelligently allocate memory across the various
components of query execution, including page caching in the buffer pool
and query operator memory use. The pool of memory used for all of these
tasks is the buffer pool itself. Hence the query operators in these
systems take memory from the buffer pool via a DBMS-implemented memory
allocator and only use the OS allocator for contiguous requests larger
than a buffer pool page.

This distinction echoes our discussion of query preparation in Section
6.3.1. The former class of systems assumes that the DBA is engaged in
sophisticated tuning, and that the workload for the system will be
amenable to carefully chosen adjustments to the system's memory
``knobs.'' Under these conditions, such systems should always perform
predictably well. The latter class assumes that DBAs either do not or
cannot correctly set these knobs, and attempts to replace DBA tuning
with software logic. They also retain the right to change their relative
allocations adaptively. This provides the possibility for better
performance on changing workloads. As discussed in Section 6.3.1, this
distinction says something about how these vendors expect their products
to be used, and about the administrative expertise (and financial
resources) of their customers.

\hypertarget{disk-management-subsystems}{%
\section{Disk Management
Subsystems}\label{disk-management-subsystems}}

DBMS textbooks tend to treat disks as homogeneous objects. In practice,
disk drives are complex and heterogeneous pieces of hardware that vary
widely in capacity and bandwidth. Hence every DBMS has a disk management
subsystem that deals with these issues and manages the allocation of
tables and other units of storage across raw devices, logical volumes or
files.

One responsibility of this subsystem is to map tables to devices and/or
files. One-to-one mappings of tables to files sounds natural, but raised
significant problems in early file systems. First, OS files
traditionally could not be larger than a disk, while database tables may
need to span multiple disks. Second, allocating too many OS files was
considered bad form, since the OS typically only allowed a few open file
descriptors, and many OS utilities for directory management and backup
did not scale to very large numbers of files. Finally, many early file
systems limited file size to 2 GB. This is clearly an unacceptably small
table limit. Many DBMS vendors circumvented the OS file system
altogether using raw IO while others chose to work around these
restrictions. Hence all leading commercial DBMS may spread a table over
multiple files or store multiple tables in a single database file. Over
time, most OS file systems have evolved beyond these limitations. But
the legacy influence persists and modern DBMSs still typically treat OS
files as abstract storage units that map arbitrarily to database tables.

More complex is the code to handle device-specific details for
maintaining temporal and spatial control as described in Section 4. A
large and vibrant industry exists today based on complex storage devices
that ``pretend'' to be disk drives, but that are in fact large
hardware/software systems whose API is a legacy disk drive interface
like SCSI. These systems include RAID systems and Storage Area Network
(SAN) devices and tend to have very large capacities and complex
performance characteristics. Administrators like these systems because
they are easy to install, and often provide easily managed, bit-level
reliability with fast failover. These features provide a significant
sense of comfort to customers, above and beyond the promises of DBMS
recovery subsystems. Large DBMS installations, for example, commonly use
SANs.

Unfortunately, these systems complicate DBMS implementations. As an
example, RAID systems perform very differently after a fault than they
do when all disks are functioning correctly. This potentially
complicates the I/O cost models for the DBMS. Some disks can operate in
write-cache enabled mode, but this can lead to data corruption during
hardware failure. Advanced SANs implement large battery-backed caches,
in some cases nearing a terabyte, but these systems bring with them well
over a million lines of microcode and considerable complexity. With
complexity comes new failure modes and these problems can be incredibly
difficult to detect and properly diagnose.

RAID systems also frustrate database designers by underperforming on
database tasks. RAID was conceived for byte stream oriented storage (a
la UNIX files), rather than the page-oriented storage used by database
systems. Hence RAID devices tend to underperform when compared with
database-specific solutions for partitioning and replicating data across
multiple physical devices. The \emph{chained declustering} scheme of
Gamma {[}43{]}, for example, roughly coincided with the invention of
RAID and performs better for a DBMS environment. Further, most databases
provide DBA commands to control the partitioning of data across multiple
devices, but RAID devices subvert these commands by hiding the multiple
devices behind a single interface.

Many users configure their RAID devices to minimize space overheads
(``RAID level 5''), when the database would perform far, far better via
simpler schemes like disk mirroring (``RAID level 1''). A particularly
unpleasant feature of RAID level 5 is that write performance is poor.
This can cause surprising bottlenecks for users, and the DBMS vendors
are often on the hook to explain or provide workarounds for these
bottlenecks. For better or worse, the use (and misuse) of RAID devices
is a fact that commercial DBMSs must take into account. As a result,
most vendors spend significant energy tuning their DBMSs to work well on
the leading RAID devices.

In the last decade, most customer deployments allocate database storage
to files rather than directly to logical volumes or raw devices. But
most DBMSs still support raw device access and often use this storage
mapping when running high-scale transaction processing benchmarks. And,
despite some of the drawback outlines above, most enterprise DBMS
storage is SAN-hosted today.

\hypertarget{replication-services}{%
\section{Replication Services}\label{replication-services}}

It is often desirable to replicate databases across a network via
periodic updates. This is frequently used for an extra degree of
reliability: the replicated database serves as a slightly-out-of-date
``warm standby'' in case the main system goes down. Keeping the warm
standby in a physically different location is advantageous to allow
continued functioning after a fire or other catastrophe. Replication is
also often used to provide a pragmatic form of distributed database
functionality for large, geographically distributed enterprises. Most
such enterprises partition their databases into large geographic regions
(e.g., nations or continents), and run all updates locally on the
primary copies of the data. Queries are executed locally as well, but
can run on a mix of fresh data from their local operations, and
slightly-out-of-date data replicated from remote regions.

Ignoring hardware techniques (e.g., EMC SRDF), three typical schemes for
replication are used, but only the third provides the performance and
scalability needed for high-end settings. It is, of course, the most
difficult to implement.

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\item
  \emph{Physical Replication}: The simplest scheme is to physically
  duplicate the entire database every replication period. This scheme
  does not scale up to large databases, because of the bandwidth for
  shipping the data, and the cost for reinstalling it at the remote
  site. Moreover, guaranteeing a transaction-ally consistent snapshot of
  the database is tricky. Physical replication is therefore used only as
  a client-side workaround at the low end. Most vendors do not encourage
  this scheme via any software support.
\item
  \emph{Trigger-Based Replication}: In this scheme, triggers are placed
  on the database tables so that upon any insert, delete, or update to
  the table, a ``difference'' record is installed in a special
  replication table. This replication table is shipped to the remote
  site, and the modifications are ``replayed'' there. This scheme solves
  the problems mentioned above for physical replication, but brings a
  performance penalty unacceptable for some workloads.

\item
  \emph{Log-Based Replication}: Log-based replication is the
  replication solution of choice when feasible. In log-based
  replication, a \emph{log sniffer process} intercepts log writes and
  delivers them to the remote system. Log-based replication is
  implemented using two broad techniques: (1) read the log and build
  SQL statements to be replayed against the target system, or (2) read
  log records and ship these to the target system, which is in
  perpetual recovery mode replaying log records as they arrive. Both
  mechanisms have value, so Microsoft SQL Server, DB2, and Oracle
  implement both. SQL Server calls the first Log Shipping and the
  second Database Mirroring.

This scheme overcomes all of the problems of the previous alternatives:
it is low-overhead and incurs minimal or invisible performance overhead
on the running system; it provides incremental updates, and hence
scales gracefully with the database size and the update rate; it reuses
the built-in mechanisms of the DBMS without significant additional
logic; and finally, it naturally provides transactionally consistent
replicas via the log's built-in logic.

Most of the major vendors provide log-based replication for their own
systems. Providing log-based replication that works across vendors is
much more difficult, because driving the vendors replay logic at the
remote end requires an understanding of that vendor's log formats.
\end{enumerate}

\hypertarget{administration-monitoring-and-utilities}{%
\section{Administration, Monitoring, and
Utilities}\label{administration-monitoring-and-utilities}}

Every DBMS provides a set of utilities for managing their systems. These
utilities are rarely benchmarked, but often dictate the manageability of
the system. A technically challenging and especially important feature
is to make these utilities run \emph{online}, i.e., while user queries
and transactions are in flight. This is important in the $24 \times 7$
operations that have become much more common in recent years due to the
global reach of e-commerce. The traditional ``reorg window'' in the wee
hours of the morning is typically no longer available. Hence most
vendors have invested significant energy in recent years in providing
online utilities. We give a flavor of these utilities here:

\begin{itemize}

\item
  \emph{Optimizer Statistics Gathering}: Every major DBMS has some means
  to sweep tables and build optimizer statistics of one sort or another.
  Some statistics, such as histograms, are non-trivial to build in one
  pass without flooding memory. For examples, see the work by Flajolet
  and Martin on computing the number of distinct values in a column
  {[}17{]}.
\end{itemize}

\begin{itemize}
\item
  \emph{Physical Reorganization and Index Construction}: Over time,
  access methods can become inefficient due to patterns of insertions
  and deletions that leave unused space. Also, users may occasionally
  request that tables be reorganized in the background, for example to
  recluster (sort) them on different columns, or to repartition them
  across multiple disks. Online reorganization of files and indexes can
  be tricky, since holding locks for any length of time must be avoided
  while maintaining physical consistency. In this sense it bears some
  analogies to the logging and locking protocols used for indexes, as
  described in Section 5.4. This has been the subject of several
  research papers {[}95{]} and patents.
\item
  \emph{Backup/Export:} All DBMSs support the ability to physically
  dump the database to backup storage. Again, since this is a
  long-running process, it cannot na\"ively set locks. Instead, most
  systems perform some kind of ``fuzzy'' dump, and augment it with
  logging logic to ensure transactional consistency. Similar schemes can
  be used to export the database to an interchange format.
\item
  \emph{Bulk Load:} In many scenarios, massive amounts of data need to
  be brought quickly into the database. Rather than inserting each row
  one at a time, vendors supply a bulk load utility optimized for high
  speed data import. Typically these utilities are supported by custom
  code in the storage manager. For example, special bulk-loading code
  for B+-trees can be much faster than repeated calls to the
  tree-insertion code.
\item
  \emph{Monitoring, Tuning, and Resource Governers:} It is not unusual,
  even in managed environments, for a query to consume more resources
  than desirable. Hence most DBMSs provide tools to assist
  administrators in identifying and preventing these kinds of problems.
  It is typical to provide a SQL-based interface to DBMS performance
  counters via ``virtual tables,'' which can show system status broken
  down by queries or by resources like locks, memory, temporary storage,
  and the like. In some systems, it is also possible to query historical
  logs of such data. Many systems allow alerts to be registered when
  queries exceed certain performance limits, including running time,
  memory or lock acquisition; in some cases the triggering of an alert
  can cause the query to be aborted. Finally, tools like IBM's
  Predictive Resource Governor attempt to prevent resource-intensive
  queries from being run at all.
\end{itemize}

\hypertarget{conclusion}{%
\chapter{Conclusion}\label{conclusion}}

As should be clear from this paper, modern commercial database sys-tems
are grounded both in academic research and in the experiences of
developing industrial-strength products for high-end customers. The task
of writing and maintaining a high-performance, fully functional
relational DBMS from scratch is an enormous investment in time and
energy. Many of the lessons of relational DBMSs, however, translate over
to new domains. Web services, network-attached storage, text and e-mail
repositories, notification services, and network monitors can all
benefit from DBMS research and experience. Data-intensive services are
at the core of computing today, and knowledge of database system design
is a skill that is broadly applicable, both inside and outside the halls
of the main database shops. These new directions raise a number of
research problems in database management as well, and point the way to
new interactions between the database community and other areas of
computing.

\hypertarget{acknowledgments}{%
\chapter*{Acknowledgments}\label{acknowledgments}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{chapter}{Acknowledgments}
\markboth{Acknowledgments}{}

The authors would like to thank Rob von Behren, Eric Brewer, Paul Brown,
Amol Deshpande, Cesar Galindo-Legaria, Jim Gray, Wei Hong, Matt Huras,
Lubor Kollar, Ganapathy Krishnamoorthy, Bruce Lind-say, Guy Lohman, S.
Muralidhar, Pat Selinger, Mehul Shah, and Matt Welsh for background
information and comments on early drafts of this paper.

\hypertarget{references}{%
\chapter*{References}\label{references}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{chapter}{References}
\markboth{References}{}

\begin{enumerate}[label={[\arabic*]}]

\item
  A. Adya, B. Liskov, and P. O'Neil, ``Generalized isolation level
  definitions,'' in \emph{16th International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE)}, San
Diego, CA, February 2000.
\item
  R. Agrawal, M. J. Carey, and M. Livny, ``Concurrency control
  performance modelling: Alternatives and implications,'' \emph{ACM
  Transactions on Database Systems (TODS)}, vol.~12, pp.~609--654,
  1987.
\item
  M. M. Astrahan, M. W. Blasgen, D. D. Chamberlin, K. P. Eswaran, J.
  Gray, P. P. Griffiths, W. F. Frank King III, R. A. Lorie, P. R.
  McJones, J. W. Mehl, G. R. Putzolu, I. L. Traiger, B. W. Wade, and V.
  Watson, ``System R: Relational approach to database management,''
  \emph{ACM Transactions on Database Systems} \emph{(TODS)}, vol.~1,
  pp.~97--137, 1976.
\item
  R. Bayer and M. Schkolnick, ``Concurrency of operations on B-trees,''
  \emph{Acta} \emph{Informatica}, vol.~9, pp.~1--21, 1977.
\item
  K. P. Bennett, M. C. Ferris, and Y. E. Ioannidis, ``A genetic
  algorithm for database query optimization,'' in \emph{Proceedings of
  the 4th International Conference on Genetic Algorithms},
  pp.~400--407, San Diego, CA, July 1991.
\item
  H. Berenson, P. A. Bernstein, J. Gray, J. Melton, E. J. O'Neil, and P.
  E. O'Neil, ``A critique of ANSI SQL isolation levels,'' in
  \emph{Proceedings of ACM SIGMOD} \emph{International Conference on
  Management of Data}, pp.~1--10, San Jose, CA, May 1995.
\item
  P. A. Bernstein and N. Goodman, ``Concurrency control in distributed
  database systems,'' \emph{ACM Computing Surveys}, vol.~13, 1981.
\item
  W. Bridge, A. Joshi, M. Keihl, T. Lahiri, J. Loaiza, and N.
  MacNaughton, ``The oracle universal server buffer,'' in
  \emph{Proceedings of 23rd International Conference} \emph{on Very
  Large Data Bases (VLDB)}, pp.~590--594, Athens, Greece, August 1997.
\item
  F. Chang, J. Dean, S. Ghemawat, W. C. Hsieh, D. A. Wallach, M.
  Burrows, T. Chandra, A. Fikes, and R. E. Gruber, ``Bigtable: A
  distributed storage system for structured data,'' in \emph{Symposium
  on Operating System Design and} \emph{Implementation (OSDI)}, 2006.
\item
  S. Chaudhuri, ``An overview of query optimization in relational
  systems,'' in \emph{Proceedings of ACM Principles of Database Systems (PODS)}, 1998.
\item
  S. Chaudhuri and U. Dayal, ``An overview of data warehousing and olap
  technology,'' \emph{ACM SIGMOD Record}, March 1997.
\item
  S. Chaudhuri and V. R. Narasayya, ``Autoadmin `what-if' index analysis
  utility,'' in \emph{Proceedings of ACM SIGMOD International Conference
  on Management of Data}, pp.~367--378, Seattle, WA, June 1998.
\item
  S. Chaudhuri and K. Shim, ``Optimization of queries with user-defined
  predicates,'' \emph{ACM Transactions on Database Systems (TODS)},
  vol.~24, pp.~177--228, 1999.
\item
  M.-S. Chen, J. Hun, and P. S. Yu, ``Data mining: An overview from a
  database perspective,'' \emph{IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data
  Engineering}, vol.~8, 1996.
\item
  H.-T. Chou and D. J. DeWitt, ``An evaluation of buffer management
  strategies for relational database systems,'' in \emph{Proceedings of
  11th International Conference on Very Large Data Bases (VLDB)},
  pp.~127--141, Stockholm, Sweden, August 1985.
\item
  A. Desphande, M. Garofalakis, and R. Rastogi, ``Independence is good:
  Dependency-based histogram synopses for high-dimensional data,'' in
  \emph{Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Data
  Engineering}, San Jose, CA, February 2001.
\item
  P. Flajolet and G. Nigel Martin, ``Probabilistic counting algorithms
  for data base applications,'' \emph{Journal of Computing System
  Science}, vol.~31, pp.~182--209, 1985.
\item
  C. A. Galindo-Legaria, A. Pellenkoft, and M. L. Kersten, ``Fast,
  randomized join-order selection --- why use transformations?,''
  \emph{VLDB}, pp.~85--95, 1994.
\item
  S. Ganguly, W. Hasan, and R. Krishnamurthy, ``Query optimization for
  parallel execution,'' in \emph{Proceedings of the ACM SIGMOD
  International Conference on} \emph{Management of Data}, pp.~9--18, San
  Diego, CA, June 1992.
\item
  M. Garofalakis and P. B. Gibbons, ``Approximate query processing:
  Taming the terabytes, a tutorial,'' in \emph{International
  Conferenence on Very Large Data} \emph{Bases}, 2001.
  www.vldb.org/conf/2001/tut4.pdf.
\item
  M. N. Garofalakis and Y. E. Ioannidis, ``Parallel query scheduling and
  optimization with time- and space-shared resources,'' in
  \emph{Proceedings of 23rd International Conference on Very Large Data
  Bases (VLDB)}, pp.~296--305, Athens, Greece, August 1997.
\item
  R. Goldman and J. Widom, ``Wsq/dsq: A practical approach for combined
  querying of databases and the web,'' in \emph{Proceedings of
  ACM-SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data}, 2000.
\item
  G. Graefe, ``Encapsulation of parallelism in the volcano query
  processing system,'' in \emph{Proceedings of ACM-SIGMOD International
  Conference on Management of Data}, pp.~102--111, Atlantic City, May
  1990.
\item
  G. Graefe, ``Query evaluation techniques for large databases,''
  \emph{Computing Surveys}, vol.~25, pp.~73--170, 1993.
\item
  G. Graefe, ``The cascades framework for query optimization,''
  \emph{IEEE Data Engineering Bulletin}, vol.~18, pp.~19--29, 1995.
\item
  C. Graham, ``Market share: Relational database management systems by
  operating system, worldwide, 2005,'' Gartner Report No: G00141017, May
  2006.
\item
  J. Gray, ``Greetings from a filesystem user,'' in \emph{Proceedings of
  the FAST '05} \emph{Conference on File and Storage Technologies}, (San
  Francisco), December 2005.
\item
  J. Gray and B. Fitzgerald, \emph{FLASH Disk Opportunity for
  Server-Applications}.
  \url{http://research.microsoft.com/~Gray/papers/FlashDiskPublic.doc}.
\item
  J. Gray, R. A. Lorie, G. R. Putzolu, and I. L. Traiger, ``Granularity
  of locks and degrees of consistency in a shared data base,'' in
  \emph{IFIP Working Conference} \emph{on Modelling in Data Base
  Management Systems}, pp.~365--394, 1976.
\item
  J. Gray and A. Reuter, \emph{Transaction Processing: Concepts and
  Techniques}. Morgan Kaufmann, 1993.
\item
  S. D. Gribble, E. A. Brewer, J. M. Hellerstein, and D. Culler,
  ``Scalable, distributed data structures for internet service
  construction,'' in \emph{Proceedings of the} \emph{Fourth Symposium on
  Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI)}, 2000.
\item
  A. Guttman, ``R-trees: A dynamic index structure for spatial
  searching,'' in \emph{Proceedings of ACM-SIGMOD International
  Conference on Management of Data}, pp.~47--57, Boston, June 1984.
\item
  L. Haas, D. Kossmann, E. L. Wimmers, and J. Yang, ``Optimizing queries
  across diverse data sources,'' in \emph{International Conference on
  Very Large Databases} \emph{(VLDB)}, 1997.
\item
  T. Haerder and A. Reuter, ``Principles of transaction-oriented
  database recovery,'' \emph{ACM Computing Surveys}, vol.~15,
  pp.~287--317, 1983.
\item
  S. Harizopoulos and N. Ailamaki, ``StagedDB: Designing database
  servers for modern hardware,'' \emph{IEEE Data Engineering Bulletin},
  vol.~28, pp.~11--16, June 2005.
\item
  S. Harizopoulos, V. Liang, D. Abadi, and S. Madden, ``Performance
  tradeoffs in read-optimized databases,'' in \emph{Proceedings of the
  32nd Very Large Databases} \emph{Conference (VLDB)}, 2006.
\item
  J. M. Hellerstein, ``Optimization techniques for queries with
  expensive methods,'' \emph{ACM Transactions on Database Systems
  (TODS)}, vol.~23, pp.~113--157, 1998.
\item
  J. M. Hellerstein, P. J. Haas, and H. J. Wang, ``Online aggregation,''
  in \emph{Proceedings of ACM-SIGMOD International Conference on
  Management of Data}, 1997.
\item
  J. M. Hellerstein, J. Naughton, and A. Pfeffer, ``Generalized search
  trees for database system,'' in \emph{Proceedings of Very Large Data
  Bases Conference} \emph{(VLDB)}, 1995.
\item
  J. M. Hellerstein and A. Pfeffer, ``The russian-doll tree, an index
  structure for sets,'' University of Wisconsin Technical Report TR1252,
  1994.
\item
  C. Hoare, ``Monitors: An operating system structuring concept,''
  \emph{Communications of the ACM (CACM)}, vol.~17, pp.~549--557, 1974.
\item
  W. Hong and M. Stonebraker, ``Optimization of parallel query execution
  plans in xprs,'' in \emph{Proceedings of the First International
  Conference on Parallel} \emph{and Distributed Information Systems
  (PDIS)}, pp.~218--225, Miami Beach, FL, December 1991.
\item
  H.-I. Hsiao and D. J. DeWitt, ``Chained declustering: A new
  availability strategy for multiprocessor database machines,'' in
  \emph{Proceedings of Sixth International Conference on Data
  Engineering (ICDE)}, pp.~456--465, Los Angeles, CA, November 1990.
\item
  Y. E. Ioannidis and Y. Cha Kang, ``Randomized algorithms for
  optimizing large join queries,'' in \emph{Proceedings of ACM-SIGMOD
  International Conference} \emph{on Management of Data}, pp.~312--321,
  Atlantic City, May 1990.
\item
  Y. E. Ioannidis and S. Christodoulakis, ``On the propagation of errors
  in the size of join results,'' in \emph{Proceedings of the ACM SIGMOD
  International Conference} \emph{on Management of Data}, pp.~268--277,
  Denver, CO, May 1991.
\item
  M. Kornacker, C. Mohan, and J. M. Hellerstein, ``Concurrency and
  recovery in generalized search trees,'' in \emph{Proceedings of ACM
  SIGMOD International} \emph{Conference on Management of Data},
  pp.~62--72, Tucson, AZ, May 1997.
\item
  H. T. Kung and J. T. Robinson, ``On optimistic methods for concurrency
  control,'' \emph{ACM Tranactions on Database Systems (TODS)}, vol.~6,
  pp.~213--226, 1981.
\item
  J. R. Larus and M. Parkes, ``Using cohort scheduling to enhance server
  performance,'' in \emph{USENIX Annual Conference}, 2002.
\item
  H. C. Lauer and R. M. Needham, ``On the duality of operating system
  structures,'' \emph{ACM SIGOPS Operating Systems Review}, vol.~13,
  pp.~3--19, April 1979.
\item
  P. L. Lehman and S. Bing Yao, ``Efficient locking for concurrent
  operations on b-trees,'' \emph{ACM Transactions on Database Systems
  (TODS)}, vol.~6, pp.~650--670, December 1981.
\item
  A. Y. Levy, ``Answering queries using views,'' \emph{VLDB Journal},
  vol.~10, pp.~270-- 294, 2001.
\item
  A. Y. Levy, I. Singh Mumick, and Y. Sagiv, ``Query optimization by
  predicate move-around,'' in \emph{Proceedings of 20th International
  Conference on Very Large} \emph{Data Bases}, pp.~96--107, Santiago,
  September 1994.
\item
  W. Litwin, ``Linear hashing: A new tool for file and table
  addressing,'' in \emph{Sixth} \emph{International Conference on Very
  Large Data Bases (VLDB)}, pp.~212--223, Montreal, Quebec, Canada,
  October 1980.
\item
  G. M. Lohman, ``Grammar-like functional rules for representing query
  optimization alternatives,'' in \emph{Proceedings of ACM SIGMOD
  International Conference} \emph{on Management of Data}, pp.~18--27,
  Chicago, IL, June 1988.
\item
  Q. Luo, S. Krishnamurthy, C. Mohan, H. Pirahesh, H. Woo, B. G.
  Lindsay, and J. F. Naughton, ``Middle-tier database caching for
  e-business,'' in \emph{Proceedings} \emph{of ACM SIGMOD International
  Conference on Management of Data}, 2002.
\item
  S. R. Madden and M. J. Franklin, ``Fjording the stream: An
  architecture for queries over streaming sensor data,'' in
  \emph{Proceedings of 12th IEEE International} \emph{Conference on Data
  Engineering (ICDE)}, San Jose, February 2002.
\item
  V. Markl, G. Lohman, and V. Raman, ``Leo: An autonomic query optimizer
  for db2,'' \emph{IBM Systems Journal}, vol.~42, pp.~98--106, 2003.
\item
  C. Mohan, ``Aries/kvl: A key-value locking method for concurrency
  control of multiaction transactions operating on b-tree indexes,'' in
  \emph{16th International} \emph{Conference on Very Large Data Bases
  (VLDB)}, pp.~392--405, Brisbane, Queens-land, Australia, August 1990.
\item
  C. Mohan, D. J. Haderle, B. G. Lindsay, H. Pirahesh, and P. M.
  Schwarz, ``Aries: A transaction recovery method supporting
  fine-granularity locking and partial rollbacks using write-ahead
  logging,'' \emph{ACM Transactions on Database} \emph{Systems (TODS)},
  vol.~17, pp.~94--162, 1992.
\item
  C. Mohan and F. Levine, ``Aries/im: An efficient and high concurrency
  index management method using write-ahead logging,'' in
  \emph{Proceedings of ACM SIG-MOD International Conference on
  Management of Data}, (M. Stonebraker, ed.), pp.~371--380, San Diego,
  CA, June 1992.
\item
  C. Mohan, B. G. Lindsay, and R. Obermarck, ``Transaction management in
  the r* distributed database management system,'' \emph{ACM
  Transactions on Database} \emph{Systems (TODS)}, vol.~11,
  pp.~378--396, 1986.
\item
  E. Nightingale, K. Veerarghavan, P. M. Chen, and J. Flinn, ``Rethink
  the sync,'' in \emph{Symposium on Operating Systems Design and
  Implementation (OSDI)}, November 2006.
\item
  OLAP Market Report. Online manuscript.
  \url{http://www.olapreport.com/market.htm}.
\item
  E. J. O'Neil, P. E. O'Neil, and G. Weikum, ``The lru-k page
  replacement algorithm for database disk buffering,'' in
  \emph{Proceedings of ACM SIGMOD} \emph{International Conference on
  Management of Data}, pp.~297--306, Washington, DC, May 1993.
\item
  P. E. O'Neil and D. Quass, ``Improved query performance with variant
  indexes,'' in \emph{Proceedings of ACM-SIGMOD International Conference
  on Management of} \emph{Data}, pp.~38--49, Tucson, May 1997.
\item
  S. Padmanabhan, B. Bhattacharjee, T. Malkemus, L. Cranston, and M.
  Huras, ``Multi-dimensional clustering: A new data layout scheme in
  db2,'' in \emph{ACM} \emph{SIGMOD International Management of Data}
  (San Diego, California, June 09-- 12, 2003) \emph{SIGMOD '03},
  pp.~637--641, New York, NY: ACM Press, 2003.
\item
  D. Patterson, ``Latency lags bandwidth,'' \emph{CACM}, vol.~47,
  pp.~71--75, October 2004.
\item
  H. Pirahesh, J. M. Hellerstein, and W. Hasan, ``Extensible/rule-based
  query rewrite optimization in starburst,'' in \emph{Proceedings of
  ACM-SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data},
  pp.~39--48, San Diego, June 1992.
\item
  V. Poosala and Y. E. Ioannidis, ``Selectivity estimation without the
  attribute value independence assumption,'' in \emph{Proceedings of
  23rd International Conference on Very Large Data Bases (VLDB)},
  pp.~486--495, Athens, Greece, August 1997.
\item
  M. P¨oss, B. Smith, L. Koll´ar, and P.-A. Larson, ``Tpc-ds,
taking decision support benchmarking to the next level,'' in
\emph{SIGMOD 2002}, pp.~582--587.
\item
  V. Prabakharan, A. C. Arpaci-Dusseau, and R. Arpaci-Dusseau,
``Analysis and evolution of journaling file systems,'' in
\emph{Proceedings of USENIX Annual Technical Conference}, April 2005.
\item
  R. Ramakrishnan and J. Gehrke, ``Database management systems,''
  McGraw-Hill, Boston, MA, Third ed., 2003.
\item
  V. Raman and G. Swart, ``How to wring a table dry: Entropy compression
  of relations and querying of compressed relations,'' in
  \emph{Proceedings of International} \emph{Conference on Very Large
  Data Bases (VLDB)}, 2006.
\item
  D. P. Reed, \emph{Naming and Synchronization in a Decentralized
  Computer System}. PhD thesis, MIT, Dept. of Electrical Engineering,
  1978.
\item
  A. Reiter, ``A study of buffer management policies for data management
  systems,'' Technical Summary Report 1619, Mathematics Research Center,
  University of Wisconsin, Madison, 1976.
\item
  D. J. Rosenkrantz, R. E. Stearns, and P. M. Lewis, ``System level
  concurrency control for distributed database systems,'' \emph{ACM
  Transactions on Database Systems (TODS)}, vol.~3, pp.~178--198, June
  1978.
\item
  S. Sarawagi, S. Thomas, and R. Agrawal, ``Integrating mining with
  relational database systems: Alternatives and implications,'' in
  \emph{Proceedings of ACM-SIGMOD International Conference on Management
  of Data}, 1998.
\item
  R. Sears and E. Brewer, ``Statis: Flexible transactional storage,'' in
  \emph{Proceedings} \emph{of Symposium on Operating Systems Design and
  Implementation (OSDI)}, 2006.
\item
  P. G. Selinger, M. Astrahan, D. Chamberlin, R. Lorie, and T. Price,
  ``Access path selection in a relational database management system,''
  in \emph{Proceedings of} \emph{ACM-SIGMOD International Conference on
  Management of Data}, pp.~22--34, Boston, June 1979.
\item
  P. Seshadri, H. Pirahesh, and T. Y. C. Leung, ``Complex query
  decorrelation,'' in \emph{Proceedings of 12th IEEE International
  Conference on Data Engineering} \emph{(ICDE)}, New Orleans, February
  1996.
\item
  M. A. Shah, S. Madden, M. J. Franklin, and J. M. Hellerstein, ``Java
  support for data-intensive systems: Experiences building the telegraph
  dataflow system,'' \emph{ACM SIGMOD Record}, vol.~30, pp.~103--114,
  2001.
\item
  L. D. Shapiro, ``Exploiting upper and lower bounds in top-down query
  optimization,'' \emph{International Database Engineering and
  Application Symposium} \emph{(IDEAS)}, 2001.
\item
  A. Silberschatz, H. F. Korth, and S. Sudarshan, \emph{Database System
  Concepts}. McGraw-Hill, Boston, MA, Fourth ed., 2001.
\item
  M. Steinbrunn, G. Moerkotte, and A. Kemper, ``Heuristic and randomized
  optimization for the join ordering problem,'' \emph{VLDB Journal},
  vol.~6, pp.~191--208, 1997.
\item
  M. Stonebraker, ``Retrospection on a database system,'' \emph{ACM
  Transactions on} \emph{Database Systems (TODS)}, vol.~5, pp.~225--240,
  1980.
\item
  M. Stonebraker, ``Operating system support for database management,''
  \emph{Communications of the ACM (CACM)}, vol.~24, pp.~412--418, 1981.
\item
  M. Stonebraker, ``The case for shared nothing,'' \emph{IEEE Database
  Engineering} \emph{Bulletin}, vol.~9, pp.~4--9, 1986.
\item
  M. Stonebraker, ``Inclusion of new types in relational data base
  systems,'' \emph{ICDE}, pp.~262--269, 1986.
\item
  M. Stonebraker, D. J. Abadi, A. Batkin, X. Chen, M. Cherniack, M.
  Ferreira, E. Lau, A. Lin, S. Madden, E. O'Neil, P. O'Neil, A. Rasin,
  N. Tran, and S. Zdonik, ``C-store: A column oriented dbms,'' in \emph{Proceedings
of the Conference on Very Large Databases (VLDB)}, 2005.
\item
  M. Stonebraker and U. Cetintemel, ``One size fits all: An idea whose
  time has come and gone,'' in \emph{Proceedings of the International
  Conference on Data} \emph{Engineering (ICDE)}, 2005.
\item
  Transaction Processing Performance Council 2006. TPC Benchmark C
  Standard Specification Revision 5.7, \url{http://www.tpc.org/tpcc/spec/tpcc\_current.pdf}, April.
\item
  T. Urhan, M. J. Franklin, and L. Amsaleg, ``Cost based query
  scrambling for initial delays,'' \emph{ACM-SIGMOD International
  Conference on Management of} \emph{Data}, 1998.
\item
  R. von Behren, J. Condit, F. Zhou, G. C. Necula, and E. Brewer,
  ``Capriccio: Scalable threads for internet services,'' in
  \emph{Proceedings of the Ninteenth Symposium on Operating System
  Principles (SOSP-19)}, Lake George, New York, October 2003.
\item
  M. Welsh, D. Culler, and E. Brewer, ``Seda: An architecture for well-conditioned,
  scalable internet services,'' in \emph{Proceedings of the
  18th Symposium on} \emph{Operating Systems Principles (SOSP-18)},
  Banff, Canada, October 2001.
\item
  C. Zou and B. Salzberg, ``On-line reorganization of sparsely-populated
  b+trees,'' pp.~115--124, 1996.
\end{enumerate}

\end{document}
